JNTUGV B. Tech. R23 
1 
 
 
 
B. Tech (R23) JNTUGV CEV (Autonomous) w.e.f 2023-24 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (Autonomous) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY: GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
                              VIZIANAGARAM-535003, ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA. 
B.Tech (R23) COURSE STRUCTURE - ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
 (AY 2023-24 onwards) 
 
I B.Tech I Semester 
 
 
Category Credits 
Basic Science Courses 7 
Engineering Science Courses 12 
Mandatory Courses 0.5 
Total Credits 19.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I Year I Semester 
S.No. Course Code Course Name L T P Credits 
1.  R23BS01 Linear Algebra & Calculus 
 
3 0 0 3 
2.  R23BS04T Chemistry 3 0 0 3 
3.  R23ES07T Introduction to Programming  3 0 0 3 
4.  R23ES03 Engineering Graphics 1 0 4 3 
5.  R23ES04 Basic Electrical & Electronics Engineering 3 0 0 3 
6.  R23BS04P Chemistry Lab 0 0 2 1 
7.  R23ES07P Computer Programming Lab 0 0 3 1.5 
8.  R23ES05 Electrical & Electronics Engineering Workshop 0 0 3 1.5 
9.  R23MC02 NSS/NCC/Scouts & Guides/Community 
Service 
0 0 1 0.5 
  Total    19.5 
JNTUGV B. Tech. R23 
2 
 
 
 
B. Tech (R23) JNTUGV CEV (Autonomous) w.e.f 2023-24 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (Autonomous) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY: GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
                              VIZIANAGARAM-535003, ANDHRA PRADESH, INDIA. 
B.Tech (R23) COURSE STRUCTURE - ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
 (AY 2023-24 onwards) 
 
I B.Tech II Semester 
 
I Year II Semester 
S.No. Course Code Course Name L T P Credits 
1. R23BS02 Differential Equations and Vector Calculus 3 0 0 3 
2. R23BS03T Engineering Physics 3 0 0 3 
3. R23HS01T Communicative English 2 0 0 2 
4. R23ES01 Basic Civil & Mechanical Engineering 3 0 0 3 
5. R23PC01T Electrical Circuit Analysis-I 3 0 0 3 
6. R23HS01P Communicative English Lab 0 0 2 1 
7. R23BS03P Engineering Physics Lab 0 0 2 1 
8. R23ES06 IT Workshop 0 0 2 1 
9. R23ES02 Engineering Workshop 0 0 3 1.5 
10. R23PC01P Electrical Circuits Lab 0 0 3 1.5 
11. R23MC01 Health and Wellness, Yoga and Sports 0 0 1 0.5 
  Total    20.5 
 
 
 
Category Credits 
Basic Science Courses 7 
Humanities & Social Science 3 
Engineering Science Courses 5.5 
Professional Core Courses 4.5 
Mandatory Courses 0.5 
Total Credits 20.5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
JNTUGV B. Tech. R23 
3 
 
 
I Year-I Semester 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
 
                                                           LINEAR ALGEBRA& CALCULUS 
(Common for all branches) 
 
Course Objectives: 
To equip the students with standard concepts and tools of mathem atics to handle various real-world 
problems and their applications. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student will be able to  
 Develop matrix algebra techniques that is needed by engineers for practical applications. 
 Familiarize with functions of several variables which is useful in optimization. 
 Learn important tools of calculus in higher dimensions.  
 Familiarize with double and triple integrals of functions of several variables in two a n d  t h r ee  
dimensions. 
 
UNIT I Matrices  
Rank of a matrix by echelon form, normal form. Cauchy 3Binet formulae (without proof).
 Inverse of Non- 
singular matrices by Gauss-Jordan method, System of linear equations: Solving system of Homogeneous 
and Non-Homogeneous equations by Gauss elimination method, Gauss Seidel Iteration Method. 
UNITII Linear Transformation and Orthogonal Transformation: 
Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors and their properties, Diagonalizati on of a matrix, Cayley-Hamilton Theorem 
(without proof), finding inverse and power of a matrix by Cayley-Hamilton Theorem, Quadratic forms and 
Nature of the Quadratic Forms, Reduction of   Quadratic form  to canonical forms by Orthogonal 
Transformation. 
UNITIII Calculus 
Mean Value Theorems: 
 Rolle9s Theorem, Lagrange9s mean value theorem  with their geometrical 
interpretation, Cauchy9s mean value theorem, Taylor9s a nd Maclaurin theorems with remainders (without 
proof), Problems and applications on the above theorems. 
UNITIV Partial differentiation and Applications (Multi variable calculus) 
Partial derivatives, total derivatives, chain rule, chang e of variables, Taylor9s and Maclaurin9s series 
expansion of functions of two variables. Jacobians, maxima  and minima of functions of two variables, 
method of Lagrange multipliers. 
JNTUGV B. Tech. R23 
4 
 
 
 
UNITV Multiple Integrals (Multi variable Calculus) 
Double integrals, triple integrals, change of order of integration, change of variables to polar, cylindrical 
and spherical coordinates. Finding areas (by double integrals ) and volumes (by double integrals and 
triple integrals). 
Textbooks: 
1. B.S.Grewal,HigherEngineeringMathematics,44/e,KhannaPublishers,2017. 
2. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 10/e, John Wiley & Sons, 2018. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. R.K.JainandS.R.K.Iyengar,AdvancedEngineeringMathematics,5/e,AlphaScienceInternationalLtd
.,2021 (9th reprint). 
2. GeorgeB.Thomas,MauriceD.WeirandJoelHass,ThomasCalculus,14/e,PearsonPublishers,2018. 
3. GlynJames, Advanced Modern Engineering Mathematics, 5/e, Pearson publishers, 2018. 
4. Michael Greenberg, Advanced EngineeringMathematics,9thedition, Pearson edn 
5. H. K Das, Er. Rajnish Verma, Higher Engineering Mathematics, S. Chand,2021 
 
JNTUGV B. Tech. R23 
5 
 
 
 
 
I Year-I semester 
   
 
 
                                                          CHEMISTRY 
(Common to EEE, ECE, CSE & IT) 
Course Objectives: 
 To familiarize engineering chemistry and its applications 
 To train the students on the principles and applications of electrochemistry and polymers 
 To introduce instrumental methods, molecular machines and switches 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, the students will be able to:  
 Explain the preparation, properties, and applications of thermopl astics & thermosetting, elastomers & 
conducting polymers. 
 Compare the materials of construction for battery and electrochemical sensors. 
 Synthesis and characterisation of modern engineering materials.  
 Explain the principles of spectrometry, Chromatographic separation of solid and liquid mixtures. 
 Summarize the concepts of colloids, micelle and nanomaterials. 
 
UNIT  I   Polymer Chemistry  
Introduction to polymers, functionality of monomers, chain growth and step growth polymerization, 
Plastics 3Thermoand Thermosetting plastics, Preparation, propertie s and applications of 3 PVC, Teflon, 
Bakelite, Nylon-6,6, carbon fibres. 
Elastomers3 Buna-S, Buna-N3preparation, properties and applications. 
Conducting polymers 3 polyacetylene, polyaniline, 3 Mechanism of conduction and applications. Bio-
Degradable polymers -  Poly Glycolic Acid (PGA), Polyl Lactic Acid (PLA). 
UNIT II   Electrochemistry and Applications:  
Electrochemical cell, Nernst equation, cell potential ca lculations and numerical problems, potentiometry- 
potentiometric titrations (redox titrations), concept o f conductivity, conductivity cell, conductometric 
titrations (acid-base titrations). 
Electrochemical sensors 3 Potentiometric sensors with examples, amperometric sensors with examples. 
Primary cells 3 Zinc-air battery, Secondary cells 3lithium-ion batteries- working of the batteries including 
cell reactions.  
Fuel cells, hydrogen-oxygenfuel cell3 working of the cells.  
 
 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
6 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
UNIT III Modern Engineering materials  
Semiconductors, band diagram in solids, Semiconductor devices  (p-n junction diode as rectifier and 
transistors)
 
Super conductors -  Introduction basic concept, applications. 
Supercapacitors: Introduction, Basic Concept-Classification 3 Applications. 
UNIT   IV     Instrumental Methods and Applications  
Electromagnetic spectrum. Absorption of radiation: Beer- Lambert9s law. UV -Visible Spectroscopy, 
electronic transition, Instrumentation, IR spectrosco py, fundamental modes and selection rules, 
Instrumentation. Chromatography-Basic Principle, Clas sification-HPLC: Principle, Instrumentation and 
Applications. 
UNIT V Surface Chemistry and Nanomaterials  
 
Introduction to surface chemistry, colloids, nanometals and nanometal oxides, micelle formation, synthesis 
of colloids (Bragg9s Method), Nano materials: Introduction, classification, prope rties and applications of 
Fullerenes, carbon nano tubes and Graphines nanoparticles a nd metal oxides, BET equation (no 
derivation) applications of colloids and nanomaterials 3 catalysis, medicine, sensors, etc. 
Textbooks: 
1. Jain and Jain, Engineering Chemistry, 16/e, DhanpatRai, 2013. 
2.  Sashi Chawla, Engineering chemistry,Dhanpat rai Publicating Co(Latest edition) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Skoog and West, Principles of Instrumental Analysis, 6/e, Thomson, 2007. 
2. J.M.Lehn, Supra Molecular Chemistry, VCH Publications 
3. D.J.Shaw, Introduction to Colloids and Surface Chemistry,  Butterworth-Heineman, 1992. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
 
 IYear-I Semester 
INTRODUCTION TO PROGRAMMING 
(Common to All branches of Engineering) 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objectives of this course are to acquire knowledge on the 
 To impart adequate knowledge on the need of programming languages  and problem-
solvingtechniques and develop 
programming skills. 
 
 To enable practical usage of Control Structures and Implement different operations on arrays. 
 
 To demonstrate the use of Strings and Functions. 
 
 To impart the knowledge of pointers and understand the principles of dynamic memoryallocation. 
 
 To understand structures and unions and illustrate the file concepts and its operations. 
 
 To impart the Knowledge Searching and Sorting Techniques. 
 
UNIT-I Introduction to Computer Problem Solving: 
Programs and Algorithms, Computer Problem-Solving Requirements,  Phases of Problem-Solving, 
Problem-Solving Strategies, Top-Down Approach, Algorithm  Designing, Program Verification,  
Improving Efficiency, Algorithm Analysis and Notations. 
 
UNIT-II Introduction to C Programming: 
Introduction, Structure of a C Program, Comments, Keywords, I dentifiers, Data Types, Variables, 
Constants, Input/Output Statements. Operators, Type Conversion, Control Flow, Relational Expressions: 
Conditional Branching Statements: if, if-else, if-else 4if, switch. BasicLoop Structures: while, do-while 
loops, for loops, nested loops, The Break and Continue Statements, and goto statements. 
 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
8 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
UNIT-III Arrays: 
Introduction, Operations on Arrays, Arrays as Function Arguments, Two-Dimensional Arrays, 
Multidimensional Arrays 
 
Pointers: Concept of a Pointer, Declaring and Initializing P ointer Variables, Pointer Expressions and 
Address Arithmetic, Null Pointers, Generic Pointers, Pointersas Function Arguments, Pointers and Arrays, 
Pointer to Pointer, Dynamic Memory Allocation, Dangling Pointer, Command Line Arguments. 
UNIT-IV Functions: 
Introduction Function: Declaration, Function Definition, Funct ion Call, Categories of Functions, Passing 
Parameters to Functions, Scope of Variables, Variable Storage Classes, Recursion. 
Strings: String Fundamentals, String Processing with and without Library Functions, Pointersand Strings. 
 
UNIT-V 
Structures, Unions, Bit Fields: Introduction, Nested Structures, A rrays of Structures, Structures and 
Functions, Self- Referential Structures, Unions, Enumer ated Data Type 4Enum variables, Using 
Typedef keyword, Bit Fields. Data Files: Introduction to Files, Using Files in C, Readingfrom Text Files, 
Writing to Text Files, Random File Access. 
Note: The syllabus is designed with C Language as the fundamental language of implementation. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the Course, the Student should be able to: 
i. Illustrate the Fundamental concepts of Computers and basics of computer programming andproblem-
solving approach. 
ii. Understand the Control Structures, branching, and looping statements. 
iii. Use of Arrays and Pointers in solving complex problems. 
iv. Develop Modular program aspects and Strings fundamentals. 
v. Demonstrate the ideas of User Defined Data types files. Sol ve real-world problems using the 
concept of Structures, 
Unions, and File operations. 
Text Books: 
1. A Structured Programming Approach Using C, Forouzan, Gilberg, 3rd Edition, Cengage. 
2. How to solve it by Computer, R. G. Dromey, 12th Edition, Pearson Education. 
3. Programming In C A-Practia1 Approach. Ajay Mittal, 1st Edition Pearson 
4. The C Programming Language, Dennis Richie And Brian Kernighan, 2nd Edition, Pearson Education. 
9 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
References: 
1. Byron Gottfried, Schaum9s Outline of Programming with C, 4th Edition, 2020, McGraw-Hill. 
2. Computer Programming. Reema Thareja, 3rd Edition, 2023, Oxford University Press 
3. Computing fundamentals and C Programming, Balagurusamy, E., McGraw-Hill Education, 2008 
4. Programming In C, Ashok Kamthane, 2nd Edition, Pearson Publication. 
5. Let us C , Yaswanth Kanetkar, 16th Edition, BPB Publication. 
 
 
Web References: 
1. http://www.c4learn.com/ 
2. http://www.geeksforgeeks.org/c/ 
3. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/122104019/ 
4. http://www.learn-c.org/ 
5. https://www.tutorialspoint.com/cprogramming/ 
10 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
I Year-I Semester 
 
 
 
 
ENGINEERING GRAPHICS 
(Common to All branches of Engineering) 
                    
Course Objectives: 
The students completing the course are expected to: 
 To enable the students with various concepts like dimensioni ng, conventions and standards related 
to Engineering Drawing  
 To impart knowledge on the projection of points, lines and plane surfaces  
 To improve the visualization skills for better understanding of projection of solids  
 To develop the imaginative skills of the students required t o understand Section of solids and 
Developments of surfaces.  
 To make the students understand the viewing perception of a sol id object in Isometric and 
Perspective projections. 
 
Course Outcomes: On completion of the course, the student should be able to: 
CO1: Understand the principles of engineering drawing, including engineering curves, scales, orthographic 
and isometric projections. 
CO2: Draw and interpret orthographic projections of points, line s, planes and solids in front, top and side 
views. 
CO3: Understand and draw projection of solids in various positions in first quadrant.  
CO4: Explain principles behind development of surfaces.  
CO5: Prepare isometric and perspective sections of simple solids 
UNIT I 
Introduction: Lines, Lettering and Dimensioning, Geometrical Constructio ns and Constructing regular 
polygons by general methods. 
Curves: construction of ellipse, parabola and hyperbola by general method, Cycloids, Involutes, Normal 
and tangent to Curves.  
Scales: Plain scales, diagonal scales and vernier scales. 
 
 
L T P C 
1 0 4 3 
 
11 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
UNIT II 
Orthographic Projections: Reference plane, importance of reference lines or Plane, Projections of a point 
situated in any one of the four quadrants.  
Projections of Straight Lines: Projections of straight lines parallel to both reference planes, perpendicular 
to one reference plane and parallel to other reference pl ane, inclined to one reference plane and parallel to 
the other reference plane. Projections of Straight Line Inclined to both the reference planes  
Projections of Planes: Regular planes Perpendicular to both reference planes, parallel to one reference 
plane and inclined to the other reference plane; plane inclined to both the reference planes.  
UNIT III 
Projections of Solids: Types of solids: Polyhedra and Solids of revolution. Proje ctions of solids in simple 
positions: Axis perpendicular to horizontal plane, Axis perpendi cular to vertical plane and Axis parallel to 
both the reference planes, Projection of Solids with  axis inclined to one reference plane and parallel to 
another plane. 
UNIT IV 
Sections of Solids: Perpendicular and inclined section planes, Sectional vie ws and True shape of section, 
Sections of solids in simple position only.  
Development of Surfaces:  Methods of Development: Parallel line development and radi al line 
development. Development of a cube, prism, cylinder, pyramid and cone.  
UNIT V 
Conversion of Views : Conversion of isometric views to orthographic views; Conversio n of orthographic 
views to isometric views. 
Computer graphics : Creating 2D&3D drawings of objects including PCB and Transfo rmations using 
Auto CAD (Not for end examination). 
Textbook:  
1. N. D. Bhatt, Engineering Drawing, Charotar Publishing House, 2016.  
Reference Books: 
1. Engineering Drawing, K.L. Narayana and P. Kannaiah, Tata McGraw Hill, 2013.  
2. Engineering Drawing, M.B.Shah and B.C. Rana, Pearson Education Inc,2009.  
3. Engineering Drawing with an Introduction to AutoCAD, Dhananjay Jol he, Tata McGraw Hill, 
2017. 
     
 
 
12 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
I Year-I Semester 
 
                            BASIC ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
(Common to All branches of Engineering) 
 
PART A: BASIC ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING 
  Course Objectives 
To expose to the field of electrical engineering, laws and pr inciples of electrical engineering and to 
acquire fundamental knowledge in the relevant field. 
Course Outcomes: After the completion of the course students will be able to  
CO1: Remember the fundamental laws, operating principles of m otors, generators, MC and MI 
instruments.  
CO2: Understand the problem-solving concepts associated to AC and DC  circuits, construction and 
operation of AC and DC machines, measuring instruments; diffe rent power generation mechanisms, 
Electricity billing concept and important safety measures related to electrical operations.  
CO3: Apply mathematical tools and fundamental concepts to derive various equations related to 
machines, circuits and measuring instruments; electricity bill calculations and layout representation of 
electrical power systems.  
CO4: Analyze different electrical circuits, performance of machines and measuring instruments.  
CO5: Evaluate different circuit configurations, Machine performance and Power systems operation. 
 
UNIT I DC & AC Circuits  
DC Circuits:  Electrical circuit elements (R, L and C), Ohm9s Law and its limitations, KCL & KVL, 
series, parallel, series-parallel circuits, Super Position theorem, Simple numerical problems.  
AC Circuits: A.C. Fundamentals: Equation of AC Voltage and current, waveform, time period, frequency, 
amplitude, phase, phase difference, average value, RMS va lue, form factor, peak factor, Voltage and 
current relationship with phasor diagrams in R, L, and C c ircuits, Concept of Impedance, Active power, 
reactive power and apparent power, Concept of power factor (Simple Numerical problems). 
 
UNIT II Machines and Measuring Instruments  
Machines: Construction, principle and operation of (i) DC Motor, (i i) DC Generator, (iii) Single Phase 
Transformer, (iv) Three Phase Induction Motor and (v) Alternator, Applications of electrical machines.   
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
 
13 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
Measuring Instruments:  Construction and working principle of Permanent Magnet M oving Coil 
(PMMC), Moving Iron (MI) Instruments and Wheat Stone bridge.  
UNIT III Energy Resources, Electricity Bill & Safety Measures 
Energy Resources: Conventional and non-conventional energy resources; Layo ut and operation of 
various Power Generation systems: Hydel, Nuclear, Solar & Wind power generation.   
Electricity bill: Power rating of household appliances including air conditi oners, PCs, Laptops, Printers, 
etc. Definition of <unit= used for consumption of electrical energy, two-part electricity tariff, calculation of 
electricity bill for domestic consumers. 
Equipment Safety Measures:  Working principle of Fuse and Miniature circuit breaker ( MCB), merits 
and demerits. Personal safety measures: Electric Shock, Earthing and its types, Safety Precautions to avoid 
shock. 
 
Textbooks:
 
1. Basic Electrical Engineering, D. C. Kulshreshtha, Tat a McGraw Hill, 2019, First 
Edition 
2. Power System Engineering, P.V. Gupta, M.L. Soni, U.S. Bhatnagar and A. Chakrabarti, 
Dhanpat Rai & Co, 2013 
3. Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering, Rajendra Prasad, PHI publishers, 2014, Third 
Edition 
Reference Books: 
1. Basic Electrical Engineering, D. P. Kothari and I. J. Na grath, Mc Graw Hill, 2019, 
Fourth Edition 
2. Principles of Power Systems, V.K. Mehtha, S.Chand Technical Publishers, 2020 
3. Basic Electrical Engineering, T. K. Nagsarkar and M. S. Sukhija, Oxford University 
Press, 2017 
4. Basic Electrical and Electronics Engineering, S. K. Bh atacharya, Person Publications, 
2018, Second Edition. 
Web Resources: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105053 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108108076 
 
 
 
 
14 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
PART B: BASIC ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
Course Objectives: 
To teach the fundamentals of semiconductor devices and it s applications, principles of digital electronics. 
 
Course Outcomes: After the completion of the course students will be able to  
CO1: Remember the fundamental concepts of semiconductor devices , rectifiers, electronic 
instrumentation systems, and number systems. 
CO2: Understand the concepts associated with vacuum tubes, nanoe lectronics, diodes, and various 
configurations and characteristics of transistors and digital electronics. 
CO3: Apply mathematical tools and fundamental concepts to deriv e various equations related to PN 
diodes, Zener diodes, transistors, and their properties, as well as basic theorems of Boolean algebra. 
CO4: Analyze the characteristics of diodes, transistors, re ctifiers, and amplifiers, and analyse the truth 
tables and functionality of logic gates. 
CO5: Evaluate different circuit configurations using diodes, tr ansistors, electronic instrumentation 
systems, simple combinational and sequential circuits, flipflops, registers, and counters. 
UNIT I SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES  
Introduction, Evolution of electronics -Vacuum tubes to nan o electronics, Characteristics of PN Junction 
Diode, Zener Effect - Zener Diode and its Characterist ics. Bipolar Junction Transistor -CB, CE, CC 
Configurations and Characteristics, Elementary Treatment of Small Signal CE Amplifier. 
 
UNIT II BASIC ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS AND INSTRUMENTATION  
Rectifiers and power supplies: Block diagram description of a  dc power supply, working of a full wave 
bridge rectifier, capacitor filter (no analysis), working of simple Zener voltage regulator. Amplifiers: 
Block diagram of Public Address system, Circuit diagram an d working of common emitter (RC coupled) 
amplifier with its frequency response.  
Electronic Instrumentation: Block diagram of an electronic instrumentation system.  
 
UNIT III DIGITAL ELECTRONICS 
Overview of Number Systems, Logic gates including Universal Ga tes, BCD codes, Excess-3 code, Gray 
code, Hamming code. Boolean Algebra, Basic Theorems and propert ies of Boolean Algebra, Truth Tables 
and Functionality of Logic Gates 3 NOT, OR, AND, NOR, NAND, XOR and XNOR. Simple 
15 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
combinational circuits3Half and Full Adders. Introduction to sequential circuits, Fli p flops, Registers and 
counters (Elementary treatment only). 
Textbooks: 
1. R. L. Boylestad & Louis Nashlesky, Electronic Devices & Circuit Theory, Pearson 
Education, 2021. 
2. R. P. Jain, Modern Digital Electronics, 4th Edition, Tata Mc Graw Hill, 2009 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. R. S. Sedha, A Textbook of Electronic Devices and Circuits, S. Chand & Co, 2010. 
2. Santiram Kal, Basic Electronics-Devices, Circuits and IT Fundamentals, Prentice Hall, India, 2002. 
3. R. T. Paynter, Introductory Electronic Devices & Circuits-C onventional Flow Version, Pearson 
Education, 2009. 
16 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
L T P C 
0 0 2 1 
I Year-I Semester  
CHEMISTRY LAB 
                           (Common to EEE, ECE, CSE & IT) 
Course Objectives: 
Verify the fundamental concepts with experiments. 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, the students will be able to 
 Determine conductance of solutions. 
 Prepare advanced polymer Bakelite materials. 
 Measure the strength of an oxidising agent.  
 Analyse the IR spectra of some organic compounds. 
List of Experiments: 
1. Conductometric titration of strong acid vs. strong base 
2. Conductometric titration of weak acid vs. strong base 
3. Determination of conductance of solutions 
      4. Determination of strength KMnO4 by using standard oxalic acid solution. 
      5. Determination of strength of an alkalinity present in water sample. 
6. Potentiometry - determination of redox potentials and emfs 
7. Preparation of a Bakelite ( Demo)  
8. Verify Lambert-Beer9s law 
9. Wavelength measurement of sample through UV-Visible Spectroscopy 
10. Measurement of 10Dq by spectrophotometric method 
11. Identification of simple organic compounds by IR 
12. Preparation of nanomaterials by precipitation method 
13. Estimation of Ferrous Iron by Dichrometry. 
14. pH metric titration of strong acid vs. strong base  
References:  
 "Vogel's Quantitative Chemical Analysis 6th Edition 6th Editio n" Pearson Publications by J. 
Mendham, R.C.Denney, J.D.Barnes and B. Sivasankar  
17 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
I Year-I Semester                  
 
                                 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING LAB 
(Common to All branches of Engineering) 
Course Objectives: 
The course aims to give students hands 3 on experience and train them on the concepts of theC- 
programming language. 
UNIT-I  
WEEK  1: 
Objective: Getting familiar with the programming environment on the compute r and writingthe first program. 
Suggested Experiments/Activities: 
Tutorial 1: Problem-solving using Computers. 
Lab1: Familiarization with the programming environment 
i) Basic Linux environment and its editors like Vi, Vim & Emacs etc. 
ii) Exposure to Turbo C, gcc 
iii) Writing simple programs using printf(), scanf() 
WEEK 2: 
Objective: Getting familiar with how to formally describe a solution to a problem in a seriesof finite steps 
using textual and  
graphic notation. 
Suggested Experiments /Activities: 
Tutorial 2: Problem-solving using Algorithms and Flow charts. 
Lab 1: Converting algorithms/flow charts into C Source code. 
Developing the algorithms/flowcharts for the following sample 
programs 
i) Sum and average of 3 numbers 
ii) Conversion of Fahrenheit to Celsius and vice versa 
iii) Simple interest calculation 
 
L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
18 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
WEEK 3: 
Objective: Learn how to define variables with the desired  data-type, initialize them with appropriate 
values and how  
arithmetic operators can be used with variables and constants. 
Suggested Experiments/Activities: 
Tutorial 3: Variable types and type conversions: 
Lab 3: Simple computational problems using arithmetic expressions. 
i) Finding the square root of a given number 
ii) Finding compound interest 
iii) Area of a triangle using Heron9s formulae 
iv) Distance traveled by an object 
UNIT-II  
WEEK 4: 
Objective: Explore the full scope of expressions, type-compatibility o f variables & constants and operators used in the  
expression, and how operator precedence works. 
Suggested Experiments/Activities: 
Tutorial4: Operators and the precedence and as associativity: 
Lab4: Simple computational problems using the operator9s precedence and associativity 
i) Evaluate the following expressions. 
a. A+B*C+(D*E) + F*G 
b. A/B*C-B+A*D/3 
c. c. A+++B---A  
d. d. J= (i++) + (++i)  
ii) Find the maximum of three numbers using the conditional operator 
iii) Take marks of 5 subjects in integers, and find the total, average in float 
WEEK 5: 
Objective:  Explore the full scope of different variants of ―if construct‖, namely if-e lse, null-- else, if-
else if*-else, switch, and nested-if, including in what scenario each can be used and how to use them. 
Explore all relational and logical operators while writing conditionals for ―if construct‖. 
Suggested Experiments/Activities: 
Tutorial 5: Branching and logical expressions: 
19 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
 
Lab 5: Problems involving if-then-else structures. 
i) Write a C program to find the max and min of four numbers using if-else. 
ii) Write a C program to generate electricity bill. 
iii) Find the roots of the quadratic equation. 
iv) Write a C program to simulate a calculator using a switch case. 
v) Write a C program to find whether the given year is a leap year. 
WEEK 6: 
Objective: Explore the full scope of iterative constructs, namely  while loop, do-while loop, and for 
loop in addition to  
structured jump constructs like break and continue, including when eachof these statements is more 
appropriate. 
Suggested Experiments/Activities: 
Tutorial 6: Loops, while and for loops
 
Lab 6: Iterative problems, e.g., the sum of series 
i) Find the factorial of a given number using any loop. 
ii) Find whether the given number is a prime or not. 
iii) Compute sine and cos series 
iv) Checking whether a number is palindrome 
v) Construct a pyramid of numbers. 
 UNIT-III 
WEEK 7: 
Objective: Explore the full scope of the Arrays construct, namel y defining and initializing 1-D and 2-D and, more  
generically, n-D arrays and referencing individual array elements from the defined array. Using integer 1-
D arrays, explore 
search solution linear search. 
Suggested Experiments/Activities: 
Tutorial 7: 1 D Arrays: searching. 
Lab 7:1D Array manipulation, linear search 
i) Find the min and max of a 1-D integer array. 
ii) Perform linear search on the 1D array. 
iii) The reverse of a 1D integer array 
iv) Find 29s complement of the given binary number. 
v) Eliminate duplicate elements in an array. 
 
20 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
WEEK 8: 
Objective: Explore the difference between other arrays and charact er arrays that can be used as Strings 
by using null characters and get comfortable with strings by doing experiments that will reverse a string 
and concatenate two strings. Explore sorting solution bubble sort using integer arrays. 
Suggested Experiments/Activities: 
Tutorial 8: 2 D arrays, sorting and Strings. 
Lab 8: Matrix problems, String operations, Bubble sort 
i) Addition of two matrices 
ii) Multiplication two matrices 
iii) Sort array elements using bubble sort 
iv) Concatenate two strings without built-in functions 
v) Reverse a string using built-in and without built-in string functions 
 
UNIT-IV 
WEEK 9: 
Objective: Explore pointers to manage a dynamic array of integers,  including memory allocation value initialization, 
resizing, changing, and reordering the contents of an array, and memory de-allocation using malloc (), 
calloc (), realloc () and free () functions. Gainexper ience processing command-line arguments received 
by C 
 
Suggested Experiments/Activities: 
Tutorial 9: Pointers, structures, and dynamic memory allocation 
Lab 9: Pointers and structures, memory dereference. 
i) Write a C program to find the sum of a 1D array using malloc() 
ii) Write a C program to find the total average of n students using structures 
iii) Enter n students data using calloc() and display failed students list 
iv) Read student name and marks from the command line and display the student details along with the total. 
v) Write a C program to implement realloc() 
 
WEEK 10: 
Objective: Experiment with C Structures, Unions, bit fields self-refe rential structures(Singly-linked 
lists), and nested structures 
 
21 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
Suggested Experiments/Activities: 
Tutorial 10: Bitfields, Self-Referential Structures, Linked lists  
Lab10: Bitfields, linked lists 
Read and print a date using dd/mm/yyyy format using bit-fields and differentiate the samewithout 
using bit-fields 
i) Create and display a singly linked list using self-referential structure. 
ii) Demonstrate the differences between structures and unions using a C program. 
iii) Write a C program to shift/rotate using bitfields. 
iv) Write a C program to copy one structure variable to another structure of the same type. 
UNIT-V 
WEEK 11: 
Objective: Explore the Functions, sub-routines, scope and extent o f variables, doing some experiments by parameter 
passing using call by value. Basic methods of numerical integration 
Suggested Experiments/Activities: 
Tutorial 11: Functions, call by value, scope and extent, 
Lab 11: Simple functions using call by value, solving differential equations using Eulerstheorem. 
i) Write a C function to calculate NCR value. 
ii) Write a C function to find the length of a string. 
iii) Write a C function to transpose of a matrix. 
iv) Write a C function to demonstrate numerical integration of differential equations using Euler9s method 
WEEK 12: 
Objective: Explore how recursive solutions can be programmed by writing recursive functionsthat can be 
invoked from the main by programming at-least five distinct problems that have naturally recursive 
solutions. 
Suggested Experiments/Activities: 
Tutorial 12: Recursion, the structure of recursive calls 
Lab 12: Recursive functions 
i) Write a recursive function to generate Fibonacci series. 
ii) Write a recursive function to find the lcm of two numbers. 
iii) Write a recursive function to find the factorial of a number. 
22 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
iv) Write a C Program to implement Ackermann function using recursion. 
v) Write a recursive function to find the sum of series. 
WEEK 13: 
Objective: Explore the basic  difference between normal and pointer  variables, Arithmetic operations 
using pointers and 
passing variables to functions using pointers 
Suggested Experiments/Activities: 
Tutorial 13: Call by reference, dangling pointers 
Lab 13: Simple functions using Call by reference, Dangling pointers. 
i) Write a C program to swap two numbers using call by reference. 
ii) Demonstrate Dangling pointer problem using a C program. 
iii) Write a C program to copy one string into another using pointer. 
iv) Write a C program to find no of lowercase, uppercase, digits and other characters using pointers. 
WEEK14: 
Objective: To understand data files and file handling with various file  I/O functions.Explore the 
differences between text and binary files. 
Suggested Experiments/Activities: 
Tutorial 14: File handling 
Lab 14: File operations 
i) Write a C program to write and read text into a file. 
ii) Write a C program to write and read text into a binary file using fread() and fwrite() 
iii) Copy the contents of one file to another file. 
iv) Write a C program to merge two files into the third file using command-line arguments. 
v) Find no. of lines, words and characters in a file 
vi) Write a C program to print last n characters of a given file. 
Course Outcomes: 
CO1: Read, understand, and trace the execution of programs written in C language.
 
CO2: Select the proper control structure for solving the problem. 
23 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
 
CO3: Develop C programs that utilize memory efficiently using progr amming constructs like pointers.  
CO4: Develop, Debug, and Execute programs to demonstrate the applic ations of arrays,functions, and 
basic concepts of pointers in C. 
Text books: 
1. Ajay Mittal, Programming in C: A practical approach, 1st Edition, Pearson. 
 
2. Byron Gottfried, Schaum9 s Outline of Programming with C, 4th Edition, 2020, McGraw Hill. 
Reference Books: 
1. Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie, The C Programming Language, Prentice- Hall of India. 
 
2. C Programming, A Problem-Solving Approach, Forouzan, Gilberg, Prasad, 3rd Edition, CENGAGE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
I Year-I Semester 
 
                ELECTRICAL & ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING WORKSHOP 
(Common to All branches of Engineering) 
Course Objectives: 
To impart knowledge on the fundamental laws & theorems of e lectrical circuits, functions of electrical 
machines and energy calculations. 
Course Outcomes: 
CO1: Understand the Electrical circuit design concept; Measurement of resistance, power, power factor; 
concept of wiring and operation of Electrical Machines and Transformer. 
CO2: Apply the theoretical concepts and operating principles to derive mathematical models for 
circuits, Electrical machines and measuring instruments; calculations for the measurement of resistance, 
power and power factor. 
CO3: Apply the theoretical concepts to obtain calculations f or the measurement of resistance, power 
and power factor. 
CO4: Analyse various characteristics of electrical circuits , electrical machines and measuring         
instruments. 
CO5: Design suitable circuits and methodologies for the mea surement of various electrical 
parameters; Household and commercial wiring. 
Activities: 
1. Familiarization of commonly used Electrical & Electronic Workshop Tools: Bread board, Solder, 
cables, relays, switches, connectors, fuses, Cutter, plie r, screwdriver set, wire stripper, flux, 
knife/blade, soldering iron, de-soldering pump etc. 
 Provide some exercises so that hardware tools and instruments are learned to be used by the 
students. 
2. Familiarization of Measuring Instruments like Voltmeters, Ammeters, Multimeter, LCR-Q meter, 
Power Supplies, CRO, DSO, Function Generator, Frequency counter. 
 Provide some exercises so that measuring instruments are learned to be used by the    students. 
3. Components: 
 Familiarization/Identification of components (Resistors,  Capacitors, Inductors, Diodes, 
transistors, IC9s etc.) 3 Functionality, type, size, colour coding package, symbol, cost etc. 
 Testing of components like Resistor, Capacitor, Diode, Transistor, ICs etc. - Compare values 
of components like resistors, inductors, capacitors etc wit h the measured values by using 
instruments 
L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
 
25 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
PART A: ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING LAB 
List of experiments: 
1. Verification of KCL and KVL 
2. Verification of Superposition theorem 
3. Measurement of Resistance using Wheat stone bridge 
4. Magnetization Characteristics of DC shunt Generator 
5. Measurement of Power and Power factor using Single-phase wattmeter 
6. Measurement of Earth Resistance using Megger 
7. Calculation of Electrical Energy for Domestic Premises 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Basic Electrical Engineering, D. C. Kulshreshtha, Tata Mc Graw Hill, 2019, First Edition 
2. Power System Engineering, P.V. Gupta, M.L. Soni, U.S. Bhatn agar and A. Chakrabarti, Dhanpat 
Rai & Co, 2013 
3. Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering, Rajendra Prasad, PHI publishers, 2014, Third       Edition 
 
Note: Minimum Six Experiments to be performed. 
PART B: ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING LAB 
Course Objectives: 
 To impart knowledge on the principles of digital electroni cs and fundamentals of          electron 
devices & its applications. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student will be able to 
 CO1: Identify & testing of various electronic components. 
CO2: Understand the usage of electronic measuring instruments.  
CO3: Plot and discuss the characteristics of various electron devices.  
CO4: Explain the operation of a digital circuit. 
CO5: Realize the truth tables of various Flip flops. 
List of Experiments: 
1. Plot V-I characteristics of PN Junction diode A) Forward bias B) Reverse bias. 
2. Plot V-I characteristics of Zener Diode and its application as voltage Regulator. 
3. Implementation of half wave and full wave rectifiers. 
4. Plot Input & Output characteristics of BJT in CE and CB configurations. 
5. Frequency response of CE amplifier. 
6. Simulation of RC coupled amplifier with the design supplied. 
26 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
7. Verification of Truth Table of AND, OR, NOT, NAND, NOR, Ex-OR, Ex-NOR gates using ICs. 
8. Verification of Truth Tables of S-R, J-K& D flip flops using respective ICs. 
Tools / Equipment Required: DC Power supplies, Multi meters, DC Ammeters, DC Voltmeters, AC 
Voltmeters, CROs, all the required active devices. 
References: 
1. R. L. Boylestad & Louis Nashlesky, Electronic Devices & Circuit Theory, Pearson 
Education, 2021. 
2. R. P. Jain, Modern Digital Electronics, 4th Edition, Tata Mc Graw Hill, 2009 
3. R. T. Paynter, Introductory Electronic Devices & Circuits 3 Conventional Flow Version, Pearson 
Education,2009. 
Note: Minimum Six Experiments to be performed. All the expe riments shall be implemented using both 
Hardware and Software. 
 
 
27 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
 
 
I Year-I Semester 
 
                           NSS/NCC/SCOUTS & GUIDES/COMMUNITY SERVICE 
(Common to All branches of Engineering) 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of introducing this course is to impart discipline, character, fraternity, teamwork, 
social consciousness among the students and engaging them in selfless service. 
 
Course Outcomes: After completion of the course the students will be able to 
CO1: Understand the importance of discipline, character and service motto. 
CO2: Solve some societal issues by applying acquired knowledge, facts, and techniques. 
CO3: Explore human relationships by analyzing social problems. 
CO4: Determine to extend their help for the fellow beings and downtrodden people. 
CO5: Develop leadership skills and civic responsibilities. 
 
UNIT IOrientation 
General Orientation on NSS/NCC/ Scouts & Guides/Community Ser vice activities, career 
guidance. 
Activities: 
i) Conducting 3ice breaking sessions-expectations from the course-knowing personal 
talents and skills 
ii) Conducting orientations programs for the students 3future plans-activities-releasing 
road map etc. 
iii) Displaying success stories-motivational biopics- award wi nning movies on societal 
issues etc. 
iv) Conducting talent show in singing patriotic songs-paintings- any other contribution. 
UNIT IINature & Care 
Activities: 
i) Best out of waste competition. 
ii) Poster and signs making competition to spread environmental awareness. 
iii) Recycling and environmental pollution article writing competition. 
iv) Organising Zero-waste day. 
v) Digital Environmental awareness activity via various social media platforms. 
L T P C 
0 0 1 0.5 
 
28 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
vi) Virtual demonstration of different eco-friendly approaches for sustainable living. 
vii) Write a summary on any book related to environmental issues. 
UNIT IIICommunity Service 
Activities: 
i) Conducting One Day Special Camp in a village contacting village-area leaders- Survey 
in the village, identification of problems- helping them to solve via media- authorities- 
experts-etc. 
ii) Conducting awareness programs on Health-related issues such as General Health, 
Mental health, Spiritual Health, HIV/AIDS, 
iii) Conducting consumer Awareness. Explaining various legal provisions etc. 
iv) Women Empowerment Programmes- Sexual Abuse, Adolescent Health and Population 
Education. 
v) Any other programmes in collaboration with local charities, NGOs etc. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Nirmalya Kumar Sinha & Surajit Majumder, A Text Book of Na tional Service Scheme 
Vol;.I, Vidya Kutir Publication, 2021 ( ISBN 978-81-952368-8-6) 
2. Red Book - National Cadet Corps 3 Standing Instructions Vol I & II, Directorate 
General of NCC, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi 
3. 
Davis M. L. and Cor nwell  D. A., ―Introduction to Environmental  Engineering‖, 
McGraw Hill, New York 4/e 2008 
4. Masters G. M., Joseph K.  and Nagendran R. ―Introduction to Environmental 
Engineering and Science‖, Pearson Education, New Delhi. 2/e 2007 
5. Ram Ahuja. Social Problems in India, Rawat Publications, New Delhi. 
General Guidelines: 
1. Institutes must assign slots in the Timetable for the activities. 
2. Institutes are required to provide instructor to mentor the students. 
Evaluation Guidelines: 
 Evaluated for a total of 100 marks. 
 A student can select 6 activities of his/her choice with a minimum of 01 activity per 
unit. Each activity shall be evaluated by the concerned tea cher for 15 marks, totalling 
to 90 marks. 
 A student shall be evaluated by the concerned teacher for 10 marks by conducting viva 
voce on the subject. 
 
*** *** *** 
29 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
 
 
I Year-II Semester 
 
 
                                     DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS AND VECTOR CALCULUS 
(Common for all branches) 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To enlighten the learner, sin the concept of differential equations and multivariable calculus. 
 To furnish the learners with basic concepts and techniques a t plus two level to lead them into 
advanced level by handling various real-world applications. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, the student will be able to 
 Solve the differential equations related to various engineering fields. 
 Identify solution methods for partial differential equations that model physical processes. 
 Interpret the physical meaning of different operators such as gradient, curl and divergence. 
 Estimate the work done against a field, circulation and flux using vector calculus. 
 
UNIT  I  Differential equations of first order and first degree 
Linear differential equations 3 Bernoulli9s equations - Exact equations and equations reducible to exact 
form.  Applications: orthogonal trajectories  
 Newton9s Law of cooling 3 Law of natural growth and decay- Electrical circuits (RL & RC) 
UNIT  II Linear differential equations of higher order (Constant Coef ficients) 
Definitions, homogenous and non-homogenous, complimentary f unction, general solution, particular 
integral, Wronskian, method of variation of parameters. Simultaneous linear equations, Applications to L-
C-R Circuit problems and Simple Harmonic motion. 
UNIT III Partial Differential Equations 
Introduction and formation of Partial Differential Equat ions by elimination of arbitrary constants and 
arbitrary functions, solutions of first order linear equations using Lagrange9s method. Charpt9s method  
Homogeneous  & Non-Homogeneous Linear Partial differential equations with constant coefficients. 
 
 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
 
30 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
UNIT IV Vector differentiation  
Scalar and vector point functions, vector operator del, de l applies to scalar point functions-Gradient, del 
applied to vector point functions-Divergence and Curl, vector identities. 
UNIT V Vector integration  
Line integral-circulation-work done, surface integral- flux, Green9s theorem in the plane (without proof), 
Stoke9s theorem (without proof), volume integral, Divergen ce theorem (without proof) and applications 
of these theorems. 
Textbooks: 
1. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 10/e, John Wiley & Sons, 2018. 
2. B.S. Grewal, Higher EngineeringMathematics,44/e, Khanna publishers,2017. 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Dennis G. Zill and Warren Wright, Advanced Engineering Mathema tics, Jones and 
Bartlett,2018. 
2. Michael Greenberg, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 9th edition, Pearson edn 
3. George B. Thomas, Maurice D. Weir and Joel Hass, Thomas C alculus, 14/e, Pearson Publishers, 
2018. 
4. R. K. Jain and S. R. K. Iyengar, Advanced Engineering Mat hematics, 5/e, Alpha Science 
International Ltd., 2021 (9th reprint). 
5. B.V. Ramana, Higher Engineering Mathematics, McGraw Hill Education, 2017 
31 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
I Year-II Semester 
Engineering Physics 
 
  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
  COURSE OBJECTIVES 
1 Bridging the gap between the Physics in school at 10+2 level  and UG level engineering 
courses. 
2 To identify the importance of the optical phenomenon i .e. interference, diffraction and 
polarization related to its Engineering applications 
3 Enlighten the periodic arrangement of atoms in Crystalline solids by Bragg9s law  
4 To explain the significant concepts of dielectric and m agnetic materials that leads to 
potential applications in the emerging micro devices. 
5 Enlightenment of the concepts of Quantum Mechanics and to pr ovide fundamentals of 
de Broglie matter waves, quantum mechanical wave equation and its application, the 
importance of free electron theory for metals. 
6. To Understand the Physics of Semiconductors and their wor king mechanism, 
Concepts utilization of transport phenomenon of charge carriers in semiconductors. 
COURSE OUTCOMES 
CO1 Explain the need of coherent sources and the conditions for sust ained interference (L2). 
Identify the applications of interference in engineering (L3). Analyze the differences 
between interference and diffraction with applications (L4). Illustrate the concept of 
polarization of light and its applications (L2). Classify ordinary refracted light and 
extraordinary refracted rays by their states of polarization (L2) 
CO2 Classify various crystal systems (L2). Identify different planes in the crystal structure 
(L3). Analyze the crystalline structure by Bragg9s X-ray diffractometer (L4). 
CO3 Explain the concept of dielectric constant and polarization i n dielectric materials (L2). 
Summarize various types of polarization of dielectrics (L2). Interpret Lorentz field and 
Claussius-Mosotti relation in dielectrics (L2). Classify the magnetic materials based on 
susceptibility and their temperature dependence (L2). 
CO4 Describe the dual nature of matter (L1). Explain the significance of wave function 
(L2). Identify the role of Schrodinger9s time independent wave equation in studying 
particle in one-dimensional infinite potential well (L 3). Identify the role of classical and 
quantum free electron theory in the study of electrical conductivity (L3). 
CO5 Classify the crystalline solids (L2). Outline the properties of charge carriers in 
semiconductors (L2). Identify the type of semiconductor using Hall effect (L2). Apply 
the concept of effective mass of electron (L3). 
32 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
Unit-I: Wave Optics 12hrs 
Interference: Introduction - Principle of superposition 3Interference of light - Interference in thin 
films (Reflection Geometry) & applications - Colors in  thin films- Newton9s Rings- Determination 
of wavelength and refractive index. 
Diffraction: Introduction - Fresnel and Fraunhofer diffractions - Fraunho fer diffraction due to 
single slit, double slit & Diffraction Grating (Qualitative). 
Polarization: Introduction -Types of polarization - Polarization by reflection, and Double refraction 
- Nicol9s Prism -Half wave and Quarter wave plates. 
Unit Outcomes: 
The students will be able to 
 Explain the need of coherent sources and the conditions for sustained interference (L2) 
 Identify engineering applications of interference (L3) 
 Illustrate the concept of polarization of light and its applications (L2) 
 Classify ordinary polarized light and extraordinary polarized light (L2) 
 
Unit II: Crystallography 8hrs 
Crystallography: Space lattice, Basis, Unit Cell and lattice parameters 3 Bravais Lattices 3 crystal 
systems (3D) 3 coordination number - packing fraction of SC, BCC & FCC - Miller indices 3 
separation between successive (hkl) planes. Bragg9s law - X-ray Diffractometer. 
Unit Outcomes: 
The students will be able to 
 Classify various crystal systems (L2) 
 Identify different planes in the crystal structure (L3) 
 Analyze the crystalline structure by Bragg9s X-ray diffractometer (L4) 
Unit-III: Dielectric and Magnetic Materials 8hrs 
Dielectric Materials: Introduction - Dielectric polarization - Dielectric pol arizability, 
Susceptibility, Dielectric constant and Displacement Vector  - Types of polarizations- Electronic 
(Quantitative), Ionic (Quantitative) and Orientation polari zations (Qualitative) - Lorentz internal 
field - Clausius-Mossotti equation. 
Magnetic Materials: Introduction - Magnetic dipole moment - Magnetization-M agnetic 
susceptibility and permeability - Classification of magneti c materials: Dia, para, Ferro, antiferro & 
Ferri magnetic materials - Domain concept for Ferromag netism (Qualitative) - Hysteresis - soft and 
hard magnetic materials. 
 
33 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
Unit Outcomes: 
The students will be able to 
 Explain the concept of dielectric constant and polarization in dielectric materials (L2) 
 Summarize various types of polarization of dielectrics (L2) 
 Interpret Lorentz field and Claussius- Mosotti relation in dielectrics(L2) 
 Classify the magnetic materials based on susceptibility and their temperature dependence 
(L2) 
 
Unit-IV: Quantum Mechanics and Free electron theory 10hrs 
 Quantum Mechanics: Dual nature of matter 3 Heisenberg9s Uncertainty Principle 3 Significance 
and properties of wave function 3 Schrodinger9s time independent  and dependent wave equations 3 
Particle in a one-dimensional infinite potential well. 
Free Electron Theory: Classical free electron theory (Qualitative with discus sion of merits and 
demerits) 3 Quantum free electron theory – electrical conductivity based on quantum free electron 
theory - Fermi-Dirac distribution and its temperature dependence. 
Unit Outcomes: 
The students will be able to 
 Explain the concept of dual nature of matter (L2) 
 Understand the significance of wave function (L2) 
 Interpret the concepts of classical and quantum free electron theories (L2) 
 
Unit – V: Semiconductors 10hrs 
Semiconductors: Formation of energy bands 3 classification of crystalline solids - Intrinsic 
semiconductors: Density of charge carriers 3 Electrical conductivity  3 Extrinsic semiconductors: 
density of charge carriers - Drift and diffusion currents  3 Einstein9s equation - Hall effect and its 
Applications. 
Unit Outcomes: 
The students will be able to 
 Outline the properties of charge carriers in semiconductors (L2) 
 Understand the carrier transportation in semiconductors (L2) 
 Identify the type of semiconductor using Hall effect (L2) 
 
 
 
34 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
Text books: 
1. <A Text book of Engineering Physics= - M. N. Avadhanulu, P.G.Kshirsagar & TVS Arun 
Murthy, S.Chand Publications, 11th Edition 2019. 
2. <Engineering Physics= - D.K.Bhattacharya and Poonam Tandon, Oxford press (2015). 
3. <Engineering Physics= - P.K.Palanisamy SciTech publications. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. <Fundamentals of Physics= - Halliday, Resnick and Walker, John Wiley &Sons. 
2. <Engineering Physics= - M.R. Srinivasan, New Age international publishers (2009). 
3. <Engineering Physics= - Shatendra Sharma, Jyotsna Sharma, Pearson Education, 2018. 
4. <Engineering Physics= - Sanjay D. Jain, D. Sahasrabudhe and Girish, University Press. 
5. <Semiconductor physics and devices:Basic principle= - A. Donald, Neamen, Mc Graw 
Hill. 
6. <Engineering Physics= - B.K. Pandey and S. Chaturvedi, Cengage Learning 
7. <Solid state physics= 3 A.J.Dekker ,Pan Macmillan publishers 
8. <Introduction to Solid State Physics= -Charles Kittel ,Wiley 
35 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
I Year-II Semester 
 
COMMUNICATIVE ENGLISH 
(Common to All Branches of Engineering) 
 
Course Objectives: 
The main objective of introducing this course, communicative  English, is to facilitate effective listening, 
Reading, Speaking and Writing skills among the students. It enha nces the same in their comprehending 
abilities, oral presentations, reporting useful informati on and providing knowledge of grammatical 
structures and vocabulary. This course helps the students to make them effective in speaking and writing 
skills and to make them industry-ready. 
Course Outcomes 
 By the end of the course the students will have Learned how to understand the context, topic, and 
specific information from social or transactional dialogues. 
 Remedially learn applying grammatical structures to formulate  sentence sand use appropriate 
words and correct word forms. 
 Using discourse markers to speak clearly on a specific topic  in formal as well as informal 
discussions.(not required)  
 Improved communicative competence in formal and informal contexts and for social and academic 
purposes. 
 Critically comprehending and appreciating reading /listening texts and to write summaries. 
 Writing coherent paragraphs essays, letters/e-mails and resume. 
 
Instructions:  
1. The reading texts can be given as podcasts to the students so that their listening skills can     
be enhanced. 
2. While listening and reading to the text can be given as homework, the class work for the  
students can be to discuss and critically evaluate the texts  based on the context, purpose or writing the 
text and understanding it from the author9s as well as reader9s point of view. 
3. Reading as habit for both academic and non-academic ( ple asure) purposes has to be inculcated in the 
students. So training has to be given in intensive and extensive reading strategies. 
4. Writing for both academic (assignments, examinations, reports, e-mails/letters etc)  
5. The writing tasks given in the class are to be self and peer evaluated by the students before they are 
finally graded by the faculty. Note: Please note that the te xts given here are just contexts for teaching 
various language skills and sub skills. The students9 ability to use  language cannot be confined to 
comprehending or using the language related to the given texts (textbooks). The given texts can be 
used only for practice. 
6. All the activities to develop language skills have to be integrate d and interconnected, within each unit 
and across the units. 
 
L T P C 
2 0 0 2 
 
36 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
UNIT I 
Lesson: HUMAN VALUES: A Power of a Plate of Rice by Ifeoma Okoye (Short story)  
Listening: Identifying the topic, the context and specific pieces of information by listening to  
                  short audio texts and answering a series of questions. 
Speaking: Asking and answering general questions on familiar topics such as home, family,  
                  work, studies and interests; introducing oneself and others. 
Reading:   Skimming to get the main idea of a text; scanning to look for specific pieces of  
                  information. 
Writing:   Mechanics of Writing-Capitalization, Spellings, Punctuation-Parts of Sentences.(  
  That has to be part of the bridge course- 2 weeks before th e actual academic  
  Programme starts)  
Grammar: Parts of Speech, Basic Sentence Structures-forming questions 
Vocabulary: Synonyms, Antonyms, Affixes (Prefixes/Suffixes), Root words 
UNIT-II 
Lesson: NATURE: Night of the Scorpion by Nissim Ezekiel (Indian and contemporary) 
Listening: Answering a series of questions about main ideas and supporting ideas after 
    Listening to audio texts. 
Speaking:  Discussion in pairs/small groups on specific topics followed by short structure  
   talks. 
  Reading:   Identifying sequence of ideas; recognizing verbal techniques that help to link the   
   ideas in a paragraph together. 
  Writing:    Structure of a paragraph - Paragraph writing (specific topics) 
  Grammar: Cohesive devices -linkers, use of articles and zero article prepositions. 
  Vocabulary: Homonyms, Homophones, Homographs. 
 
 
37 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
UNIT-III 
Lesson: BIOGRAPHY: Steve Jobs. 
Listening: Listening for global comprehension and summarizing what is listened to.  
Speaking: Discussing specific topics in pairs or small groups and reporting what is discussed    
Reading:   Readingatextindetailbymakingbasicinferences-recognizingandinterpretingspecific 
                  Context clues; strategies to use text clues for comprehension.   
Writing:  Summarizing, Note-making, paraphrasing.   
Grammar: Verbs - tenses;subject-verbagreement; Compound words, Collocations   
Vocabulary: Compound words, Collocations 
UNIT- IV 
Lesson: INSPIRATION: The Toys of Peace by Saki 
Listening: Making predictions while listening to conversations/ transactional dialogues  
   Without video; listening with video. 
Speaking: Role plays for practice of conversational English in academic contexts(formal and 
                   informal) - asking for and giving information/directions. 
Reading:   Studying the use of graphic elements in texts to convey information, reveal trends/  
   Patterns/ relationships, communicate processesor displ ay complicated data. 
Writing:   Letter Writing: Official Letters, Resumes 
Grammar: Reporting verbs, Direct & Indirect speech, Active&PassiveVoice 
Vocabulary: Words often confused, Jargons 
UNIT- V 
Lesson: MOTIVATION: The Power of Intrapersonal Communication (An Essay)  
Listening: Identifying key terms, understanding concepts and answering a series of relevant 
    questions that test comprehension. 
Speaking: Formal oral presentations on topics from academic contexts 
Reading:   Reading comprehension. 
38 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
Writing:    Writing structured essays on specific topics. 
Grammar: Editing short texts 3identifying and correcting common errors in grammar and  
     usage (articles, prepositions, tenses, subject verb agr eement) 
Vocabulary: Technical Jargons 
Textbooks: 
1. Pathfinder: Communicative English for Undergraduate Students,  1 st     Edition, Orient 
BlackSwan, 2023 (Units 1,2 & 3) 
2. Empowering English   by Cengage Publications, 2023 (Units 4 & 5) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Dubey, Sham Ji & Co. English for Engineers, Vikas Publishers, 2020 
2. Bailey, Stephen. Academic writing: A Handbook for International Students. Routledge, 2014. 
3. Murphy, Raymond. English Grammar in Use, Fourth Edition, Ca mbridge University Press, 
2019. 
4. Lewis, Norman. Word Power Made Easy- The Complete Handb ook for Building a Superior 
Vocabulary.  Anchor, 2014. 
Web Resources:  
GRAMMAR:  
1. www.bbc.co.uk/learningenglish 
2. https://dictionary.cambridge.org/grammar/british-grammar/ 
3. www.eslpod.com/index.html 
4. https://www.learngrammar.net/ 
5. https://english4today.com/english-grammar-online-with-quizzes/ 
6. https://www.talkenglish.com/grammar/grammar.aspx 
VOCABULARY 
1. https://www.youtube.com/c/DailyVideoVocabulary/videos 
2. https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC4cmBAit8i_NJZE8qK8sfpA 
 
39 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
I Year-II Semester 
                                BASIC CIVIL & MECHANICAL ENGINEERING 
(Common to All branches of Engineering) 
Course Objectives: 
 Get familiarized with the scope and importance of Civil Engineering sub-divisions. 
 Introduce the preliminary concepts of surveying. 
 Acquire preliminary knowledge on Transportation and its impo rtance in nation9s 
economy. 
 Get familiarized with the importance of quality, conveyance and storage of water. 
 Introduction to basic civil engineering materials and construction techniques. 
 
Course Outcomes: On completion of the course, the student should be able to: 
CO1: Understand various sub-divisions of Civil Engineering and  to appreciate their role in 
ensuring better society. 
CO2: Know the concepts of surveying and to understand the measurement of distances, angles 
and levels through surveying. 
CO3: Realize the importance of Transportation in nation' s economy and the engineering 
measures related to Transportation. 
CO4: Understand the importance of Water Storage and Conveyance Structures so that the social 
responsibilities of water conservation will be appreciated. 
CO5: Understand the basic characteristics of Civil Engineering Materials and attain knowledge 
on prefabricated technology. 
 
PART A: BASIC CIVIL ENGINEERING 
UNIT I 
Basics of Civil Engineering: Role of Civil Engineers in Society- Various Disciplines of Civil 
Engineering- Structural Engineering- Geo-technical Engineering- Transportation Engineering 
- Hydraulics and Water Resources Engineering - Environmental Engineering-Scope of each 
discipline - Building Construction and Planning- Construction Materials-Cement - Aggregate - 
Bricks- Cement concrete- Steel. Introduction to Prefabricated construction Techniques. 
40 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
UNIT II 
Surveying: Objectives of Surveying- Horizontal Measurements- Angular Me asurements- 
Introduction to Bearings Levelling instruments used for levelling -Simple problems on levelling    
and bearings-Contour mapping. 
UNIT III 
Transportation Engineering Importance of Transportation in Nation's economic 
development- Types of Highway Pavements- Flexible Paveme nts and Rigid Pavements - 
Simple Differences. Basics of Harbour, Tunnel, Airport, and Railway Engineering 
Water Resources and Environmental Engineering: Introduction, Sources of water- Quality of water- 
Specifications- Introduction to Hydrology3Rainwater Harvesting-Water Storage and Conveyance 
Structures (Simple introduction to Dams and Reservoirs). 
Textbooks: 
1. Basic Civil Engineering, M.S.Palanisamy, , Tata Mcgraw Hill publications (India) Pvt. 
Ltd. Fourth Edition. 
2. Introduction to Civil Engineering, S.S. Bhavikatti, New Age I nternational Publishers. 
2022. First Edition. 
3. Basic Civil Engineering, Satheesh Gopi, Pearson Publications, 2009, First Edition. 
Reference Books: 
1. Surveying, Vol- I and Vol-II, S.K. Duggal, Tata McGraw Hill Pu blishers 2019. Fifth 
Edition. 
2. Hydrology and Water Resources Engineering, Santosh Kumar Garg, Khanna 
Publishers, Delhi. 2016 
3. Irrigation Engineering and Hydraulic Structures - Santo sh Kumar Garg, Khanna 
Publishers, Delhi 2023. 38th Edition. 
4. Highway Engineering, S.K.Khanna, C.E.G. Justo and Veeraraghavan, Nemchand 
and Brothers Publications 2019. 10th Edition. 
5. Indian Standard DRINKING WATER 4 SPECIFICATION IS 10500-2012. 
 
 
PART B: BASIC MECHANICAL ENGINEERING 
Course Objectives: The students after completing the course are expected to 
 Get familiarized with the scope and importance of Mechanica l Engineering in different 
sectors and industries. 
 Explain different engineering materials and different manufacturing processes. 
 Provide an overview of different thermal and mechanical transmission systems and 
           introduce basics of robotics and its applications. 
41 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
Course Outcomes: On completion of the course, the student should be able to 
CO1: Understand the different manufacturing processes. 
CO2: Explain the basics of thermal engineering and its applications. 
CO3: Describe the working of different mechanical power transmission systems and power 
plants. 
CO4: Describe the basics of robotics and its applications. 
CO5: Explain the basics of engineering materials and its applications 
UNIT I   
Introduction to Mechanical Engineering: Role of Mechanical Engineering in Industries and Society  
Technologies in different sectors such as Energy, Manuf acturing, Automotive, Aerospace, and Marine 
sectors. 
Engineering Materials – Metals - Ferrous and Non-ferrous, Ceramics, Composites, Smart materials. 
 
UNIT II 
Manufacturing Processes: Principles of Casting, Forming, joining processes, Machining, Introduction to 
CNC machines, 3D printing, and Smart manufacturing.  
Thermal Engineering 3 working principle of Boilers, Otto cycle, Diesel cycle, Re frigeration and air-
conditioning cycles, IC engines, 2-Stroke and 4-Stroke engi nes, SI/CI Engines, Components of Electric 
and Hybrid Vehicles. 
 
UNIT III 
Power plants 3 working principle of Steam, Diesel, Hydro, Nuclear power plants. 
Mechanical Power Transmission - Belt Drives, Chain, Rope drives, Gear Drives and their applications. 
Introduction to Robotics - Joints & links, configurations, and applications of robotics.  
 
(Note: The subject covers only the basic principles of Civil and Me chanical Engineering systems. 
The evaluation shall be intended to test only the fundamentals of the subject) 
 
 
42 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Internal Combustion Engines by V.Ganesan, By Tata McGraw Hill publications (India)  Pvt. Ltd. 
2. A Tear book of Theory of Machines by S.S. Rattan, Tata Mc Graw Hill Publications, (India) Pvt. 
Ltd. 
3. An introduction to Mechanical Engg by Jonathan Wicker and Kem per Lewis, cengage learning 
India pvt. Ltd. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. AppuuKuttan KK, Robotics, I.K. International Publishing House Pvt. Ltd. Volume-I 
2. 3D printing & Additive Manufacturing Technology- L. Jyothish Kumar, Pulak M Pandey, Springer 
publications  
3. Thermal Engineering by Mahesh M Rathore Tata Mcgraw Hill publications (India) Pvt. Ltd. 
4. G. Shanmugam and M.S.Palanisamy, Basic Civil and the Mechanic al Engineering, Tata Mcgraw 
Hill publications (India) Pvt. Ltd. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
I Year-II Semester 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
 
                                                            Electrical Circuit Analysis-I 
Course Objectives: 
To develop an understanding of the fundamental laws, elemen ts of electrical circuits and to apply circuit 
analysis to DC and AC circuits.  
Course Outcomes:  
CO 1: Remembering the basic electrical elements and different fundamental laws.  
CO 2:  Understand the network reduction techniques, transformations, co ncept of self-inductance and 
mutual inductance, phasor diagrams, resonance and network theorems. 
CO 3: Apply the concepts to obtain various mathematical and graphical representations. 
CO 4: Analyze and nodal and mesh networks, series and parallel ci rcuits, steady state response, different 
circuit topologies (with R, L and C components). 
CO 5: Evaluation of Network theorems.
 
UNIT I INTRODUCTION TO ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS 
Basic Concepts of passive elements of R, L, C and their  V-I relations, Sources (dependent and 
independent), Kirchhoff9s laws, Network reduction techniques (series , parallel, serie s - parallel, star-to-
delta and delta-to-star transformation), source transfor mation technique, nodal analysis and mesh analysis 
to DC networks with dependent and independent voltage and current sources, node and mesh analysis.   
UNIT II MAGNETIC CIRCUITS 
Basic definition of MMF, flux and reluctance, analogy be tween electrical and magnetic circuits, Faraday9s 
laws of electromagnetic induction 3 concept of self and mutual inductance, Dot convention 3 coefficient of 
coupling and composite magnetic circuit, analysis of series and parallel magnetic circuits.  
UNIT III SINGLE PHASE CIRCUITS 
Characteristics of periodic functions, Average value, R.M .S. value, form factor, representation of a sine 
function, concept of phasor, phasor diagrams, node and mesh  analysis. Steady state analysis of R, L and C 
circuits to sinusoidal excitations-response of pure resist ance, inductance, capacitance, series RL circuit, 
series RC circuit, series RLC circuit, parallel RL circuit, parallel RC circuit.  
UNIT IV RESONANCE AND LOCUS DIAGRAMS 
44 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
Series Resonance: Characteristics of a series resona nt circuit, Q-factor, selectivity and bandwidth, 
expression for half power frequencies; Parallel resonance: Q-factor, selectivity and bandwidth; 
Locus diagram: RL, RC, RLC with R, L and C variables. 
UNIT V NETWORK THEOREMS (DC & AC EXCITATIONS)  
Superposition theorem, Thevenin9s theorem, Norton9s theore m, Maximum Power Transfer theorem, 
Reciprocity theorem, Millman9s theorem and compensation theorem.  
Textbooks: 
1. Engineering Circuit Analysis, Jack E. Kemmerley, William Hayt and steven Durbin, Tata Mc Graw 
Hill Education, 2005, sixth edition 
2. Network Analysis, M. E. Van Valkenburg, Pearson Education, 2019, Revised Third Edition  
Reference Books: 
1. Fundamentals of Electrical Circuits, Charles K. Alexander and Mathew N.O. Sadiku, 
Mc Graw Hill Education (India), 2013, Fifth Edition. 
2. Electric Circuits 3 (Schaum9s outline series), Mahmood Nahvi, Joseph Edministe r,  and K. Rao, 
Mc Graw Hill Education, 2017, Fifth Edition. 
3. Electric Circuits, David A. Bell, Oxford University Press, 2009, Seventh Edition. 
4. Introductory Circuit Analysis, Robert L Boylestad, Pearson Publications, 2023, Fourteen Edition. 
5. Circuit Theory: Analysis and Synthesis, A. Chakrabarthi, Dhanpat Rai & Co., 2018, Seventh 
Revised Edition. 
 
Web Resources: 
1. 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc23-ee81/preview 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/course/108104139 
3. https://nptel.ac.in/course/108106172 
4. https://nptel.ac.in/course/117106108 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
 I Year-II Semester 
                                       COMMUNICATIVE ENGLISH LAB 
                       (Common to All Branches of Engineering)                                         
Course Objectives: 
The main objective of introducing this course, Communicative English Laboratory, is to expose the 
students to a variety of self-instructional, learner friendly modes of language learning students will get 
trained in the basic communication skills and also make them ready to face job interviews. 
Course Outcomes: 
 Understand the different aspects of the English language proficiency with emphasis on LSRW 
skills. 
 Apply communication skills through various language learning activities. 
 Analyze the English speech sounds, stress, rhythm, intonation and syllabledivision for better 
listening and speaking comprehension. 
 Evaluate and exhibit professionalism in participating in debates and group discussions. 
 Create effective resonate and prepare themselves to face interviews in future. 
List of Topics: 
1. Vowels & Consonants ( Not rules but use of them in various syllable structures)  
2. Neutralization/Accent Rules (No rules again, required more practice)  
3. Communication Skills & JAM  
4. Role Play or Conversational Practice  
5. ( This can be part of theory course)Resume Writing, Cover letter, SOP  
6. Group Discussions-methods & practice  
7. Debates- Methods & Practice  
8. PPT Presentations/ Poster Presentation  
9. Interviews Skills 
Suggested Software: 
 Walden Infotech 
 Young India Films 
Reference Books: 
1.Meenakshi Raman, Sangeeta-Sharma. Technical Communication. Oxford Press.2018.( This      
L T P C 
0 0 2 1 
46 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
    can be for theory and not for lab) 
2. Samson T : Innovate with English, Foundations  
3. Grant Taylor: English Conversation Practice, Tata McGraw-Hill EducationIndia,2016  
4. Jayashree, M Let9s Hear them Speak: Developing Listening-Speaking skills in English. 
.    Sage Publications 
5. Hewing9s, Martin. Cambridge Academic English (B2). CUP, 2012. ( That is for reading  
    and writing and can be used in theory classes but not in Lab) 
6. T.Balasubramanyam, A Textbook of English Phonetics for Indian Students,(3rd Ed)  
    Trinity Press. (This is all theory and can be for MA English students but not for  
    B.Tech students) 
Web Resources: 
Spoken English: 
1. www.esl-lab.com  
2. www.englishmedialab.com 
3. www.englishinteractive.net  
4. https://www.britishcouncil.in/english/online 
5. http://www.letstalkpodcast.com/ 
6. https://www.youtube.com/c/mmmEnglish_Emma/featured 
7. https://www.youtube.com/c/ArnelsEverydayEnglish/featured  
8. https://www.youtube.com/c/engvidAdam/featured 
9. https://www.youtube.com/c/EnglishClass101/featured  
10. https://www.youtube.com/c/SpeakEnglishWithTiffani/playlists  
11. https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCV1h_cBE0Drdx19qkTM0WNw 
12. https://www.linguahouse.com/en-GB 
13. https://www.ted.com/watch/ted-ed 
 
Voice & Accent: 
      1.. https://www.youtube.com/user/letstalkaccent/videos 
      2. https://www.youtube.com/c/EngLanguageClub/featured 
      3. https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC_OskgZBoS4dAnVUgJVexc 
4. https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCNfm92h83W2i2ijc5Xwp_IA 
 
47 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
I Year-II Semester 
L T P C 
0 0 2 1 
                                      ENGINEERING PHYSICS LAB 
              (Common to All Branches of Engineering) 
 
(Any TEN of the following listed experiments) 
(Out of which any TWO experiments m ay be conducted in virtual mode) 
 
List of Engineering Physics Experiments 
1. Determination of radius of curvature of a given plano convex lens by Newton9s rings. 
2. Determination of wavelengths of different spectral lines in mercury spectrum using 
diffraction grating in normal incidence configuration. 
3. Verification of Brewster9s law 
4. Determination of dielectric constant using parallel plate capacitor. 
5. Study the variation of B versus H by magnetizing the magnetic material (B-H curve). 
6. Determination of wavelength of Laser light using diffraction grating. 
7. Estimation of Planck9s constant using photoelectric effect. 
8. Determination of energy gap of a semiconductor using PN junction diode. 
10 Magnetic field along the axis of a current carrying c ircular coil by Stewart & Gee9s 
Method. 
11. Determination of Hall voltage and Hall coefficient of a gi ven semiconductor using Hall 
effect. 
12. Determination of rigidity modulus of the material of the given wire using Torsional 
pendulum. 
13. V-I Characteristics ofa  PN junction diode 
14. V-I Characteristics of Zener diode 
15. To study the various types of crystal structures. 
References: 
1. <A Text Book of Practical Physics= - S. Balasubramanian, M.N. Srinivasan, S. Chand 
Publishers, 2017. 
 
URL:www.vlab.co.in
48 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
I Year-II Semester 
 
 
                                                 IT WORKSHOP 
                        (Common to all branches of Engineering) 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To introduce the internal parts of a computer, peripherals, I/O ports, connecting cables 
 
 To demonstrate configuring the system as Dual boot for Windows a nd other OperatingSystems Viz. 
Linux, BOSS 
 
 To teach basic command line interface commands on Linux. 
 
 To teach the usage of the Internet for productivity and self-paced life-long learning 
 
 To introduce Compression, Multimedia, Antivirus tools and Office Tools such asWord processors, 
spreadsheets, and 
Presentation tools. 
 
PC Hardware & Software Installation 
Task 1: Identify the peripherals of a computer, components in a C PU, and functions. Draw the block 
diagram of the CPU 
along with the configuration of each peripheral and submit to your instructor. 
 
Task 2: Every student should disassemble and assemble the PC back to working condition. 
Labinstructors should verify the work and follow it up with a  Viva. Also, students must go through the 
video showing the PC assembling process. A video would be given as part of the course content. 
Task 3 : Students should install MS windows on their personal computer . The labinstructor should 
verify the installation and follow it with a Viva. 
Task 4: Every student should install Linux on the computer. This comput er should have Windows 
installed. The system should be configured as dual boot (VMWare ) with Windows and Linux. Lab 
instructors should verify the installation and follow it up with a Viva. 
L T P C 
0 0 2 1 
 
49 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
Task 5: Every student should install BOSS on the computer. The sys tem should be configuredas dual 
boot (VMWare) with Windows and BOSS. Lab instructors should verify the installation and follow it up 
with a Viva. 
 
Internet & World Wide Web 
Task 1: Orientation & Connectivity Boot Camp: Students should connec t to their Local Area Network 
and access the Internet. In the  process, they configure the TCP/IP setting.  Finally, students should  
demonstrate to the  instructor how to access the websites and email. Without internet connecti vity, 
instructors must simulate the WWWon the LAN. 
Task 2: Web Browsers, Surfing the Web: Students customize their we b browsers with the LANproxy 
settings, bookmarks, search toolbars, and pop-up blockers. Als o, plug-ins like Macromedia Flash and 
JRE for applets should be configured. 
Task 3: Search Engines & Netiquette: Students should know what search engines are and howto use 
the search engines. A few topics would be given to the student s for which they need to search on 
Google. This should be demonstrated to the instructors by the student. 
Task 4: Cyber Hygiene: Students would be exposed to the various threats  on the internet and asked to 
configure their computers to be safe on the internet. They need to customize their browsers to block pop-
ups, and block active X downloads to avoid viruses and worms. 
LaTeX and WORD 
Task 1 – Word Orientation: The mentor needs to give an overview of LaT eX and Microsoft (MS) 
Office or equivalent (FOSS) tool word: Importance of La TeX and MS office or equiv alent(FOSS) tool 
Word as word Processors, Details of  the four tasks and features that would be covered in each, Using 
LaTeX and word 3 Accessing, overview of toolbars, saving files, Usinghelp and r esources, rulers, 
format painter in word. 
Task 2: Using LaTeX and Word to create a project certificate. Features to be covered:- Formatting Fonts 
in Word, Drop Cap in Word, Applying Text effects, Using C haracter Spacing,Borders, and Colors, 
Inserting Header and Footer, Using Date and Time options in LaTeXand Word. 
Task 3: Creating project abstract Features to be covered: Formatti ng Styles, Inserting table, Bullets and 
Numbering, Changing Text Direction, Cell alignment, Footnote,  Hyperlink, Symbols, Spell Check, 
Track Changes. 
Task 4: Creating a Newsletter: Features to  be covered:- Table of Contents, Newspaper columns, Images  
from files and clipart, Drawing toolbar and Word Art, Formatting Images, Te xtboxes, Paragraphs, and 
Mail Merge in word. 
 
50 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
EXCEL 
Excel Orientation: The mentor needs to tell the importance of theMS Office o r equivalent (FOSS)tool 
Excel as a Spreadsheet tool give the details of the four tasks and features that would be covered in each. 
Using Excel 3 Accessing an overview of toolbars, saving Excel files, Using helpand resources. 
Task 1: Creating a Scheduler - Features to be covered: Gridlines,  Format Cells, Summation, auto-fill, 
Formatting Text 
 
Task 2: Calculating GPA -. Features to be covered:- Cell Referencing, Formulae in Excel 3 average, std. 
deviation, Charts, 
Renaming and Inserting worksheets, Hyperlinking, Count function, 
 
LOOKUP/LOOKUP 
Task 3: Split cells, freeze panes, group and outline, Sorting,  Boolean and logical operators, Conditional 
formatting 
 
POWERPOINT 
Task 1: Students will be working on essential PowerPoint utilities and tools which help them create 
introductory PowerPoint presentations. PPT Orientation, S lide Layouts, Inserting Text, Word Art, 
Formatting Text, Bullets and Numbering, Auto Shapes, Lines and Arrows in PowerPoint. 
Task 2: Interactive presentations - Hyperlinks, Inserting 3Images, Clip Art, Audio, Video, Objects, Tables 
and Charts. 
Task 3: Master Layouts (slide, template, and notes), Types of vie ws (basic, presentation, slide slotter, 
notes, etc), and  
Inserting 3 Background, textures, Design Templates, Hidden slides. 
 
AI TOOLS – Chat GPT 
Task 1: Prompt Engineering: Experiment with different prompts to se e how the model responds. Try 
asking questions, 
starting conversations, or even providing incomplete sentencesto see how the model completes them. 
 Ex: Prompt: <You are a knowledgeable AI. Please answer the following question: Whatis the capital of 
France?= 
Task 2: Creative Writing: Use the model as a writing assistant. Provide the beginning of a storyor a scene 
description, and 
let the model generate the rest of the content. This can be a funway to brainstorm creative ideas  
51 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
 Ex: Prompt: <In a world where gravity suddenly stopped working, people started floatin g upwards. 
Write a story about how society adapted to this new reality.= 
Task 3: Language Translation: Experiment with translation tasks by providing a sentence in one 
language and asking the model to translate it into another la nguage. Compare the output tosee how 
accurate and fluent the translations are. 
 Ex:Prompt: <Translate the following English sentence to French: 8Hello, how are you doing today?9= 
 
Course Outcomes: 
CO1: Perform Hardware troubleshooting. 
 
CO2: Understand Hardware components and inter dependencies. 
 
CO3: Safeguard computer systems from viruses/worms. 
 
CO4: Document/ Presentation preparation. 
 
CO5: Perform calculations using spreadsheets. 
 
 
 
 
Reference Books:
 
1. Comdex Information Technology course tool kit, Vikas Gupta, WILEY Dream Tech, 2003 
2. The Complete Computer Upgrade and Repair Book, Cheryl A Schmidt, WILEY Dream tech, 2013, 3rd 
edition 
3. Introduction to Information Technology, ITL Education Sol utions Limited, PearsonEducation, 
2012, 2nd edition 
4. PC Hardware - A Handbook, Kate J. Chase, PHI (Microsoft) 
5. LaTeX Companion, Leslie Lamport, PHI/Pearson. 
6. IT Essentials PC Hardware and Software Companion Guide, Davi d Anfins on and Ken Quamme. 3 
CISCO Press, 
Pearson Education, 3rd edition 
7. IT Essentials PC Hardware and Software Labs and Study Guide,  Patrick Regan 3 CISCO Press, 
Pearson Education,3rd edition 
 
52 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
I Year-II Semester 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
ENGINEERING WORKSHOP 
(Common to All branches of Engineering) 
To familiarize students with wood working, sheet metal operations, fitting and electrical house 
wiring skills 
Course Outcomes:  
CO1: Identify workshop tools and their operational capabilities. 
CO2: Practice on manufacturing of components using workshop tra des including fitting, carpentry,  
foundry and welding. 
CO3: Apply fitting operations in various applications. 
CO4: Apply basic electrical engineering knowledge for house wiring Practice  
CO5: Construct the sheet metal jobs from GI sheets and preparation of pipe joints using plumbing 
SYLLABUS 
 
1. Demonstration: Safety practices and precautions to be observed in workshop. 
2. Wood Working: Familiarity with different types of woods and tools used in wood 
working and make following joints. 
a) Half 3 Lap joint b) Mortise and Tenon joint c) Corner Dov etail joint or Bridle 
joint 
3. Sheet Metal Working : Familiarity with different types of tools used in sheet metal 
working, Developments of following sheet metal job from GI sheets. 
a) Tapered tray b) Conical funnel c) Elbow pipe d) Brazing 
4. Fitting: Familiarity with different types of tools used in fitting  and do the following 
fitting exercises. 
a) V-fit b) Dovetail fit c) Semi-circular fit d) Bicycle  tire puncture 
and change of two-wheeler tyre 
5. Electrical Wiring: Familiarity with different types of basic electrical circuits and make 
the following connections. 
a) Parallel and series b) Two-way switch c) Godown lighti ng 
d) Tube light e) Three phase motor f) Soldering of wires 
6. Foundry Trade: Demonstration and practice on Moulding tools and processes, 
Preparation of Green Sand Moulds for given Patterns. 
L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
 
53 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
7. Welding Shop: Demonstration and practice on Arc Welding and Gas welding.  
Preparation of Lap joint and Butt joint. 
8. Plumbing: Demonstration and practice of Plumbing tools, Preparation o f Pipe joints 
with coupling for same diameter and with reducer for different diameters. 
Textbooks:  
1. Basic Workshop Technology: Manufacturing Process, Felix W.; Independently Published,2019. 
Workshop Processes, Practices and Materials; Bruce J. Black, Routledge publishers, 5th Edn. 2015.  
2. A Course in Workshop Technology Vol I. & II, B.S. Raghuwanshi , Dhanpath Rai & Co., 2015 & 
2017.  
 
Reference Books:  
1. Elements of Workshop Technology, Vol. I by S. K. Hajra C houdhury & Others, Media Promoters 
and Publishers, Mumbai. 2007, 14th edition  
2. Workshop Practice by H. S. Bawa, Tata-McGraw Hill, 2004.  
3. Wiring Estimating, Costing and Contracting; Soni P.M. & Upa dhyay P.A.; Atul Prakashan, 2021-
22. 
54 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
I Year-II Semester                            Electrical Circuits Lab 
 
Course Objectives: 
To impart hands on experience in verification of circuit laws and theorems, measurement of circuit 
parameters, study of circuit characteristics. It also gi ves practical exposure to the usage of different 
circuits with different conditions. 
Course Outcomes: 
CO1: Understand the concepts of network theorems, node and mesh  networks, series and 
parallel resonance and Locus diagrams. 
CO2: Apply various theorems to compare practical results ob tained with theoretical 
calculations. 
CO3: Determine self, mutual inductances and coefficient of coupling  values, parameters o f    
choke coil. 
CO4: Analyse different circuit characteristics with the hel p of fundamental laws and various 
configurations. 
CO5: Create locus diagrams of RL, RC series circuits and ex amine series and parallel 
resonance. 
List of Experiments: 
1. Verification of Kirchhoff's circuit laws. 
2. Verification of node and mesh analysis. 
3. Verification of network reduction techniques. 
4. Determination of cold and hot resistance of an electric lamp. 
5. Determination of Parameters of a choke coil. 
6. Determination of self, mutual inductances, and coefficient of coupling. 
7. Series and parallel resonance. 
8. Locus diagrams of R-L (L Variable) and R-C (C Variable) series circuits. 
9. Verification of Superposition theorem. 
10. Verification of Thevenin9s and Norton9s Theorems. 
11. Verification of Maximum power transfer theorem. 
12. Verification of Compensation theorem. 
13. Verification of Reciprocity and Millman9s Theorems. 
 
L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
55 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Engineering Circuits Analysis, Jack E Kemmerly, William Hayt  and Steven Durbin, 
Tata Mc Graw Hill Education, 2005, sixth edition. 
2.    Network Analysis, M. E. Van Valkenburg, Pearson Education  
 
 
 
***** 
56 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
 
I Year-II Semester 
 
                            HEALTH AND WELLNESS, YOGA AND SPORTS 
(Common to All branches of Engineering) 
 
Course Objectives: 
 
The main objective of introducing this course is to make the students maintain their 
mental and physical wellness by balancing emotions in their life. It mainly enhances 
the essential traits required for the development of the personality. 
 
Course Outcomes: After completion of the course the student will be able to 
CO1: Understand the importance of yoga and sports for Physical fitness and sound health. 
CO2: Demonstrate an understanding of health-related fitness 
components. CO3: Compare and contrast various activities that help 
enhance their health. CO4: Assess current personal fitness levels. 
CO5: Develop Positive Personality 
UNIT I 
Concept of health and fitness, Nutrition and Balanced di et, basic concept of 
immunity Relationship between diet and fitness, Globalizatio n and its impact on 
health, Body Mass Index (BMI) of all age groups. 
Activities: 
i) Organizing health awareness programmes in community 
ii) Preparation of health profile 
iii) Preparation of chart for balance diet for all age groups 
 
UNIT II 
Concept of yoga, need for and importance of yoga, origi n and history of yoga in 
Indian context, classification of yoga, Physiological e ffects of Asanas- Pranayama 
and meditation, stress management and yoga, Mental health and yoga practice. 
Activities: 
Yoga practices 3 Asana, Kriya, Mudra, Bandha, Dhyana, Surya Namaskar 
 
L T P C 
0 0 1 0.5 
 
57 
JNTUGV-CEV(A) 
 
 
UNIT III 
Concept of Sports and fitness, importance, fitness compo nents, history of sports, 
Ancient and Modern Olympics, Asian games and Commonwealth games. 
Activities: 
 
i) Participation in one major game and one individual sport viz ., Athletics, 
Volleyball, Basketball, Handball, Football, Badminton, Kabadd i, Kho-kho, 
Table tennis, Cricket etc. 
Practicing general and specific warm up, aerobics 
ii) Practicing cardiorespiratory fitness, treadmill, run te st, 9 min walk, skipping 
and running. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Gordon Edlin, Eric Golanty. Health and Wellness, 14th Edn. Jones & Bartlett 
Learning, 2022 
2. T.K.V.Desikachar. The Heart of Yoga: Developing a Personal Practice 
3. Archie J.Bahm. Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, Jain Publishing Company, 1993 
4. Wiseman, John Lofty, SAS Survival Handbook: The Ultimate  Guide to 
Surviving Anywhere Third Edition, William Morrow Paperbacks, 2014 
5. The Sports Rules Book/ Human Kinetics with Thomas Hanlon. -- 3rd 
ed. Human Kinetics, Inc.2014 
General Guidelines: 
1. Institutes must assign slots in the Timetable for the activities of Health/Sports/Yoga. 
2. Institutes must provide field/facility and offer the minimum of five choices 
of as many as Games/Sports. 
3. Institutes are required to provide sports instructor / yoga teacher to mentor the students. 
Evaluation Guidelines: 
 Evaluated for a total of 100 marks. 
 A student can select 6 activities of his/her choice with  a minimum of 01 
activity per unit. Each activity shall be evaluated by the concerned teacher 
for 15 marks, totalling to 90 marks. 
 A student shall be evaluated by the concerned teacher for  10 marks by 
conducting viva voce on the subject. 
 
 
 
 
******** 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Course Structure 
B.Tech. II Year-I Semester 
S.No. Category Title L T P Credits 
1 BS Complex Variables & 
Numerical Methods 
3 0 0 3 
2 HSMC 
Universal Human Values – 
Understanding Harmony and 
Ethical Human Conduct 
2 1 0 3 
3 Engineering Science Electromagnetic Field Theory 3 0 0 3 
4 Professional Core Electrical Circuit Analysis-II 3 0 0 3 
5 Professional Core DC Machines & Transformers 3 0 0 3 
6 Professional Core Electrical Circuit Analysis-II and 
Simulation Lab 
0 0 3 1.5 
7 Professional Core DC Machines & Transformers Lab 0 0 3 1.5 
8 Skill Enhancement 
Course 
Data Structures Lab 0 1 2 2 
9 Audit Course Environmental Science 2 0 0 - 
Total 15 2 10 20 
 
B.Tech. II Year-II Semester 
S.No. Category Title L T P Credits 
1 Management Course- I Managerial Economics & 
Financial Analysis 
2 0 0 2 
2 Engineering 
Science/Basic Science 
Analog Circuits 3 0 0 3 
3 Professional Core Power Systems-I 3 0 0 3 
4 Professional Core Induction and Synchronous 
Machines 
3 0 0 3 
5 Professional Core Control Systems 3 0 0 3 
6 Professional Core Induction and Synchronous 
Machines Lab 
0 0 3 1.5 
7 Professional Core Control Systems Lab 0 0 3 1.5 
8 Skill Enhancement course Python Programming Lab 0 1 2 2 
9 Engineering 
Science 
Design Thinking 
& Innovation 
1 0 2 2 
Total 15 1 10 21 
Mandatory Community Service Project Internship of 08 weeks duration during summer vacation 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
Course Outcomes:   
After successful completion of this course, the students should be able to: 
 
COs Statements Blooms 
level 
CO1 Analyze limit, continuity and differentiation of functions of complex variab les and 
Understand Cauchy-Riemann equations, analytic functions and various properties of 
analytic functions. 
L2, L3 
CO2 Understand Cauchy theorem, Cauchy integral formulas and apply these to evaluate 
complex contour integrals. Classify singularities and poles; find residues and evaluate 
complex integrals using the residue theorem. 
L3, L5 
CO3 Apply numerical methods to solve algebraic and transcendental equations  L3 
CO4 Derive interpolating polynomials using interpolation formulae L2, L3 
CO5 Solve differential and integral equations numerically L3, L5 
 
UNIT I : Complex Variable – Differentiation                                                                                  
Introduction to functions of complex variable-concept of Limit & continuity- Di fferentiation, Cauchy-
Riemann equations, analytic functions harmonic functions, finding harmonic conjugate-construc tion of 
analytic function by Milne Thomson method. 
 
UNIT II: Complex Variable – Integration   
Line integral- Contour integration, Cauchy’s integral theorem(Simple Case), Cauchy Integral formula, 
Power series expansions: Taylor’s series, zeros of analytic functions, singularit ies, Laurent’s series, 
Residues, Cauchy Residue theorem (without proof),  Evaluation of definite integral  involving sine and 
cosine. 
 
UNIT III: Solution of Algebraic & Transcendental Equations  
Introduction-Bisection Method-Iterative method, Regula-falsi method, secant met hod and Newton 
Raphson method  
 
UNIT IV: Interpolation   
Finite differences-Newton’s forward and backward interpolation formulae – Lagrange’s formulae.- Gauss 
forward and backward interpolation formula- Newton’s divided difference formula 
 
UNIT V: Solution of Initial value problems to Ordinary differential equations                            
Numerical solution of Ordinary Differential equations: Solution by Taylor’s ser ies-Picard’s Method of 
successive Approximations- Euler’s and modified Euler’s methods -Runge-Kutta methods (second and 
fourth order).  
 
Textbooks: 
1. B. S. Grewal, Higher Engineering Mathematics, Khanna Publishers, 2017, 44th Edition 
2. S S Sastry, Introductory Methods of Numerical Analysis, PHI Learning Private Limited. 
 
 
 
 
II Year-I Semester COMPLEX VARIABLES AND NUMERICAL 
METHODS 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, John Wiley & Sons, 2018, 10th Edition. 
2. B.V.Ramana, Higher Engineering Mathematics, by Mc Graw Hill publishers 
3. R. K. Jain and S. R. K. Iyengar, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, Al pha Science 
International Ltd., 2021  5th Edition(9th reprint). 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc17_ma14/preview  
2. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc20_ma50/preview 
3. http://nptel.ac.in/courses/111105090 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
• To help the students appreciate the essential complementary between 'VALUES' and 
'SKILLS' to ensure sustained happiness and prosperity which are the core aspirations of 
all human beings. 
• To facilitate the development of a Holistic perspective among students towards life and 
profession as well as towards happiness and prosperity based on a correct understanding 
of the Human reality and the rest of existence. Such holistic perspective forms the basis 
of Universal Human Values and movement towards value-based living in a natural way. 
• To highlight plausible implications of such a Holistic understanding in terms of ethical 
human conduct, trustful and mutually fulfilling human behaviour and mutually enriching 
interaction with Nature. 
 
Course Outcomes:   
• Define the terms like Natural Acceptance, Happiness and Prosperity (L1, L2) 
• Identify one’s self, and one’s surroundings (family, society nature) (L1, L2) 
• Apply what they have learnt to their own self in different day-to-day settings in real 
life (L3) 
• Relate human values with human relationship and human society. (L4) 
• Justify the need for universal human values and harmonious existence (L5) 
• Develop as socially and ecologically responsible engineers (L3, L6) 
 
Course Topics 
The course has 28 lectures and 14 tutorials in 5 modules. The lectures and tutorials are of 1-hour 
duration. Tutorial sessions are to be used to explore and practice what has been proposed during 
the lecture sessions.  
The Teacher’s Manual provides the outline for lectures as well as practice sessions. The teacher 
is expected to present the issues to be discussed as propositions and encourage the students to 
have a dialogue. 
 
UNIT I Introduction to Value Education (6 lectures and 3 tutorials for practice session) 
Lecture 1: Right Understanding, Relationship and Physical Facility (Holistic 
Development and the Role of Education) 
Lecture 2: Understanding Value Education 
Tutorial 1: Practice Session PS1 Sharing about Oneself 
Lecture 3: self-exploration as the Process for Value Education 
Lecture4: Continuous Happiness and Prosperity – the Basic Human Aspirations 
Tutorial 2: Practice Session PS2 Exploring Human Consciousness 
Lecture 5: Happiness and Prosperity – Current Scenario 
Lecture 6: Method to Fulfill the Basic Human Aspirations 
Tutorial 3: Practice Session PS3 Exploring Natural Acceptance 
II Year-I Semester 
  UNIVERSAL HUMAN VALUES – 
UNDERSTANDING HARMONY AND 
ETHICAL HUMAN CONDUCT 
 
L T P C 
2 1 0 3 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT II Harmony in the Human Being (6 lectures and 3 tutorials for practice session) 
Lecture 7: Understanding Human being as the Co-existence of the self and the 
body. 
Lecture 8: Distinguishing between the Needs of the self and the body 
Tutorial 4: Practice Session PS4 Exploring the difference of Needs of self and 
body. 
Lecture 9: The body as an Instrument of the self 
Lecture 10: Understanding Harmony in the self 
Tutorial 5: Practice Session PS5 Exploring Sources of Imagination in the self 
Lecture 11: Harmony of the self with the body 
Lecture 12: Programme to ensure self-regulation and Health 
Tutorial 6: Practice Session PS6 Exploring Harmony of self with the body 
 
UNIT III  Harmony in the Family and Society (6 lectures and 3 tutorials for practice 
session) 
Lecture 13: Harmony in the Family – the Basic Unit of Human Interaction 
Lecture 14: 'Trust' – the Foundational Value in Relationship 
Tutorial 7: Practice Session PS7 Exploring the Feeling of Trust 
Lecture 15: 'Respect' – as the Right Evaluation 
Tutorial 8: Practice Session PS8 Exploring the Feeling of Respect 
Lecture 16: Other Feelings, Justice in Human-to-Human Relationship 
Lecture 17: Understanding Harmony in the Society 
Lecture 18: Vision for the Universal Human Order 
Tutorial 9: Practice Session PS9 Exploring Systems to fulfil Human Goal 
 
UNIT IV Harmony in the Nature/Existence (4 lectures and 2 tutorials for practice session) 
Lecture 19: Understanding Harmony in the Nature 
Lecture 20: Interconnectedness, self-regulation and Mutual Fulfilment among 
the Four Orders of Nature 
Tutorial 10: Practice Session PS10 Exploring the Four Orders of Nature 
Lecture 21: Realizing Existence as Co-existence at All Levels 
Lecture 22: The Holistic Perception of Harmony in Existence 
Tutorial 11: Practice Session PS11 Exploring Co-existence in Existence. 
 
UNIT V Implications of the Holistic Understanding – a Look at Professional Ethics (6 
lectures and 3 tutorials for practice session) 
Lecture 23: Natural Acceptance of Human Values 
Lecture 24: Definitiveness of (Ethical) Human Conduct 
Tutorial 12: Practice Session PS12 Exploring Ethical Human Conduct 
Lecture 25: A Basis for Humanistic Education, Humanistic Constitution and 
Universal Human Order 
Lecture 26: Competence in Professional Ethics 
Tutorial 13: Practice Session PS13 Exploring Humanistic Models in Education 
Lecture 27: Holistic Technologies, Production Systems and Management Models-
Typical Case Studies 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Lecture 28: Strategies for Transition towards Value-based Life and Profession 
Tutorial 14: Practice Session PS14 Exploring Steps of Transition towards 
Universal Human Order 
 
Practice Sessions for UNIT I – Introduction to Value Education 
PS1 Sharing about Oneself 
PS2 Exploring Human Consciousness 
PS3 Exploring Natural Acceptance 
 
Practice Sessions for UNIT II – Harmony in the Human Being 
PS4 Exploring the difference of Needs of self and body 
PS5 Exploring Sources of Imagination in the self 
PS6 Exploring Harmony of self with the body 
 
Practice Sessions for UNIT III – Harmony in the Family and Society 
PS7 Exploring the Feeling of Trust 
PS8 Exploring the Feeling of Respect 
PS9 Exploring Systems to fulfil Human Goal 
 
Practice Sessions for UNIT IV – Harmony in the Nature (Existence) 
PS10 Exploring the Four Orders of Nature 
PS11 Exploring Co-existence in Existence 
 
Practice Sessions for UNIT V – Implications of the Holistic Understanding – a Look at Professional 
Ethics 
PS12 Exploring Ethical Human Conduct 
PS13 Exploring Humanistic Models in Education 
PS14 Exploring Steps of Transition towards Universal Human Order 
 
READINGS: 
Textbook and Teachers Manual 
a. The Textbook 
R R Gaur, R Asthana, G P Bagaria, A Foundation Course in Human Values and Professional Ethics , 2nd 
Revised Edition, Excel Books, New Delhi, 2019. ISBN 978-93-87034-47-1 
b. The Teacher’s Manual 
R R Gaur, R Asthana, G P Bagaria, Teachers’ Manual for A Foundation Course in Human Values and 
Professional Ethics,  2nd Revised Edition, Excel Books, New Delhi, 2019. ISBN 978-93-87034-53-2 
 
Reference Books 
1. JeevanVidya: EkParichaya, A Nagaraj, JeevanVidyaPrakashan, Amarkantak, 1999. 
2. Human Values, A.N. Tripathi, New Age Intl. Publishers, New Delhi, 2004. 
3. The Story of Stuff (Book). 
4. The Story of My Experiments with Truth - by Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi 
5. Small is Beautiful - E. F Schumacher. 
6. Slow is Beautiful - Cecile Andrews 
7. Economy of Permanence - J C Kumarappa 
8. Bharat Mein Angreji Raj – PanditSunderlal 
9. Rediscovering India - by Dharampal 
10. Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule - by Mohandas K. Gandhi 
11. India Wins Freedom - Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad 
12. Vivekananda - Romain Rolland (English) 
13. Gandhi - Romain Rolland (English) 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Mode of Conduct: 
Lecture hours are to be used for interactive discussion, placing the proposals about  the topics at hand and 
motivating students to reflect, explore and verify them. 
Tutorial hours are to be used for practice sessions. 
While analyzing and discussing the topic, the faculty mentor’s role is in pointing to essen tial elements to 
help in sorting them out from the surface elements. In other words, help the students explore the 
important or critical elements. 
In the discussions, particularly during practice sessions (tutorials), the mentor  encourages the student to 
connect with one’s own self and do self-observation, self-reflection and self-exploration. 
 
Scenarios may be used to initiate discussion. The student is encouraged to take up =ordinary= situations 
rather than= extra -ordinary= situations. Such observations and their analyses are shared and discussed 
with other students and faculty mentor, in a group sitting. 
 
Tutorials (experiments or practical) are important for the course. The diff erence is that the laboratory is 
everyday life, and practical are how you behave and work in real life. Depending on  the nature of topics, 
worksheets, home assignment and/or activity are included. The practice sessions (tutori als) would also 
provide support to a student in performing actions commensurate to his/her beliefs. It is intended that this 
would lead to development of commitment, namely behaving and working based on basic human values. 
It is recommended that this content be placed before the student as it  is, in the form of a basic foundation 
course, without including anything else or excluding any part of this content. A dditional content may be 
offered in separate, higher courses. This course is to be taught by faculty from every teaching department, 
not exclusively by any one department. 
Teacher preparation with a minimum exposure to at least one 8-day Faculty Developm ent Program on 
Universal Human Values is deemed essential. 
 
Online Resources: 
1. https://fdp-si.aicte-india.org/UHV-
II%20Class%20Notes%20&%20Handouts/UHV%20Handout%201-
Introduction%20to%20Value%20Education.pdf 
2. https://fdp-si.aicte-india.org/UHV-
II%20Class%20Notes%20&%20Handouts/UHV%20Handout%202-
Harmony%20in%20the%20Human%20Being.pdf 
3. https://fdp-si.aicte-india.org/UHV-
II%20Class%20Notes%20&%20Handouts/UHV%20Handout%203-
Harmony%20in%20the%20Family.pdf 
4. https://fdp-si.aicte-india.org/UHV%201%20Teaching%20Material/D3-
S2%20Respect%20July%2023.pdf 
5. https://fdp-si.aicte-india.org/UHV-
II%20Class%20Notes%20&%20Handouts/UHV%20Handout%205-
Harmony%20in%20the%20Nature%20and%20Existence.pdf 
6. https://fdp-si.aicte-india.org/download/FDPTeachingMaterial/3-days%20FDP-
SI%20UHV%20Teaching%20Material/Day%203%20Handouts/UHV%203D%20D3-
S2A%20Und%20Nature-Existence.pdf 
7. https://fdp-si.aicte-
india.org/UHV%20II%20Teaching%20Material/UHV%20II%20Lecture%2023-
25%20Ethics%20v1.pdf 
8. https://www.studocu.com/in/document/kiet-group-of-institutions/universal-human-
values/chapter-5-holistic-understanding-of-harmony-on-professional-ethics/62490385 
9. https://onlinecourses.swayam2.ac.in/aic22_ge23/preview 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B. Tech-II Year – 
I SEMESTER ENGINEERING SCIENCE L T P C 
  3 0 0 3 
ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELD THEORY 
 
Pre-requisite: Concepts of Differential Equations, Vector Calculus and Basic Electrical Circuits 
Course Objectives:  
• To study the production of electric field and potentials due to different configurations of 
static charges. 
• To study the properties of conductors and dielectrics, calculate the capacitance of 
different configurations. Understand the concept of conduction and convection current 
densities. 
• To study the magnetic fields produced by currents in different configurations, application 
of Ampere’s law and the Maxwell’s second and third equations , magnetic force and 
torque through Lorentz force equation in magnetic field environment like conductors and 
other current loops. 
• To develop the concept of self and mutual inductances and the energy stored. 
• To study time varying and Maxwell’s equations in different forms and Maxwell’s fourth 
equation for the induced EMF. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course, student will be able to, 
CO1: Compute electric fields and potentials using Gauss law/ solve Laplace’s or                     
           Poisson’s equations for various electric charge distributions. 
CO2:  Analyse the behaviour of conductors in electric fields, electric diploe and the  
          capacitance and energy stored in dielectrics. 
CO3: Calculate the magnetic field intensity due to current carrying conductor and  
understanding the application of Ampere’s law, Maxwell’s second and third law  
magnetic force and Equations 
CO4: Estimate self and mutual inductances and the energy stored in the magnetic field. 
 CO5: Understand the concepts of Faraday’s laws, Displacement current, Poynting                   
          theorem and Poynting vector. 
 
UNIT - I 
Vector Analysis: 
Vector Algebra: Scalars and Vectors, Unit vector, Vector addition and subtraction, Position and 
distance vectors, Vector multiplication, Components of a vector. 
Coordinate Systems: Rectangular, Cylindrical and Spherical coordinate systems. 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Vector Calculus: Differential length, Area and Volume. Del operator, Gradient of a scalar, 
Divergence of a vector and Divergence theorem (definition only). Curl of a vector and Stoke’s 
theorem (definition only). 
 
 
Electrostatics:  
Coulomb’s law and Electric field intensity (EFI) –  EFI due to Continuous charge distributions 
(line and surface charge), Electric flux density, Work done in moving a point charge in an 
electrostatic field, Electric Potential- properties of potential function, Potential gradient, Gauss’s 
law (Maxwell’s first equation, 
), Laplace’s and Poison’s equations. 
 
UNIT - II 
Conductors – Dielectrics and Capacitance:  
Behaviour of conductor in Electric field, Electric dipole and dipole moment – Potential and EFI 
due to an electric dipole, Torque on an Electric dipole placed in an electric field, Current density-
conduction and convection current densities, Ohm’s law in point form, Behaviour of conductors 
in an electric field, Polarization, dielectric constant and strength, Continuity equation and 
relaxation time, Boundary conditions between conductor to dielectric, dielectric to dielectric and 
conductor to free space, Capacitance of parallel plate, coaxial and spherical capacitors, Energy 
stored and density in a static electric field. 
 
UNIT - III  
Magneto statics, Ampere’s Law and Force in magnetic fields:  
Biot-Savart’s law and its applications viz. Straight current carrying filament, circular, square, 
rectangle and solenoid current carrying wire – Magnetic flux density and Maxwell’s second 
Equation (
), Ampere’s circuital law and its applications viz. MFI due to an infinite sheet, 
long filament, solenoid, toroidal current carrying conductor, point form of Ampere’s circuital 
law, Maxwell’s third equation (
). 
Magnetic force, moving charges in a magnetic field – Lorentz force equation, force on a current 
element in a magnetic field, force on a straight and a long current carrying conductor in a 
magnetic field, force between two straight long and parallel current carrying conductors, 
Magnetic dipole, Magnetic torque, and moment. 
 
UNIT - IV  
Self and mutual inductance:  
Self and mutual inductance – determination of self-inductance of a solenoid, toroid, coaxial cable 
and mutual inductance between a straight long wire and a square loop wire in the same plane – 
Energy stored and energy density in a magnetic field.  
 
 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT - V  
Time Varying Fields:  
Faraday’s laws of electromagnetic induction, Maxwell’s fourth equation
 , integral 
and point forms of Maxwell’s equations, statically and dynamically induced EMF, Displacement 
current, Modification of Maxwell’s equations for time varying fields, Poynting theorem and 
Poynting vector.  
 
Textbooks:  
1. <Principles of Electromagnetics = by Matthew N O Sadiku,  S.V Kulakarni, Oxford 
Publications, Asian Edition, 6th edition, 2022.  
2. <Engineering Electromagnetics= by William H. Hayt& John. A. Buck Mc. Graw -Hill,              
9th Editon.2020.  
Reference Books:  
1. <Introduction to Electro Dynamics= by D J Griffiths, Prentice -Hall of India Pvt. Ltd,4 th  
edition,2020 
2. <Electromagnetic Field Theory= by Yaduvir Singh, Pearson India, 1st edition, 2011.  
3. <Fundamentals of Engineering Electromagnetics= by Sunil Bhooshan, Oxford University  
Press, 2012.  
4. Schaum's Outline of Electromagnetics by Joseph A. Edminister, Mahamood Navi,4 th 
Edition,2014.  
Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/106/108106073/ 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117103065
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
B. Tech-II Year – 
I SEMESTER PROFESSIONAL CORE L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT ANALYSIS-II 
 
Pre-requisite: Analysis of DC and Single-phase AC Circuits, Concepts of differentiation and 
integration. 
 
Course Objectives:  
• To understand three phase circuits  
• To analyse transients in electrical systems 
• To evaluate network parameters of given electrical network 
• To apply Fourier analysis to electrical systems 
• To understand graph theory for circuit analysis and to understand the behaviour of filters  
 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course, student will be able to,  
CO1: Analyse the balanced and unbalanced 3 phase circuits for power calculations. 
CO2: Analyse the transient behaviour of electrical networks in different domains.  
CO3: Estimate various Network parameters.  
CO4: Apply the concept of Fourier series to electrical systems. 
CO5: Analyse the filter circuit for electrical circuits. 
 
UNIT - I 
Analysis of three phase balanced circuits: 
Phase sequence, star and delta connection of sources and loads, relationship between line and 
phase quantities, analysis of balanced three phase circuits, measurement of active and reactive  
power. 
Analysis of three phase unbalanced circuits: 
Loop method, Star-Delta transformation technique, measurement of active and reactive power. 
 
UNIT – II 
Laplace transforms – Definition and Laplace transforms of standard functions (Impulse, Step, 
Ramp, Parabolic) – Shifting theorem – Laplace Transforms of derivatives and integrals, Inverse 
Laplace transforms.  
 
Transient Analysis: Transient response of R-L, R-C and R-L-C circuits for D.C. and sinusoidal 
excitations – Initial conditions - Solution using differential equation approach and Laplace 
transform approach. 
 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT - III  
Network Parameters:  Impedance parameters, Admittance parameters, Hybrid parameters, 
Transmission (ABCD) parameters, conversion of Parameters from one form to other, Conditions 
for Reciprocity and Symmetry, Interconnection of Two Port networks in Series, Parallel and 
Cascaded configurations- problems. 
 
UNIT - IV  
Fourier Analysis:   
Trigonometric and exponential form of Fourier series, evaluation of Fourier coefficients, 
Symmetry in Fourier Series – Even Symmetry, Odd Symmetry, Half Wave Symmetry, Quarter 
Wave Symmetry, Average & RMS values of periodic waveforms, Analysis of Electric Circuits 
with Periodic Excitation. 
 
UNIT - V  
Filters: Classification of filters-Low pass, High pass, Band pass and Band Elimination filters, 
Constant-k filters -Low pass and High Pass, Design of Filters - Low pass and High pass. 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Engineering Circuit Analysis, William Hayt and Jack E. Kemmerly, 9 th Edition McGraw-
Hill, 2020 
2. Fundamentals of Electric Circuits, Charles K. Alexander, Mathew N. O. Sadiku, 7 th 
Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2022 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Network Analysis, M. E. Van Valkenburg, 3rd Edition, PHI, 2019. 
2. Network Theory, N. C. Jagan and C. Lakshminarayana, 3 rd Edition, B. S. Publications, 
2015. 
3. Circuits and Networks Analysis and Synthesis, A. Sudhakar, Shyam Mohan S. Palli, 5 th 
Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2017. 
4. Engineering Network Analysis and Filter Design (Including Synthesis of One Port 
Networks)-  Durgesh C. Kulshreshtha Gopal G. Bhise, Prem R. Chadha ,Umesh 
Publications 2012. 
5. Circuit Theory: Analysis and Synthesis, A. Chakrabarti, Dhanpat Rai & Co., 2018, 7 th 
Revised Edition. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/117/106/117106108/ 
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105159/ 
 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B. Tech-II Year – 
I SEMESTER PROFESSIONAL CORE L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
DC MACHINES & TRANSFORMERS 
Pre-requisite: Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion, Electromagnetic fields and 
Electrical Circuit Analysis. 
  
Course Objectives: 
Students will get exposure to 
• Understand the characteristics and applications of DC Machines. 
• Develop problem solving skills about the starting, speed control and testing of DC 
Machines. 
• Understand the concepts of efficiency and regulation of a transformer by obtaining 
equivalent circuit. 
• Understand the performance of single-phase transformers. 
• Understand the connection diagrams of three-phase transformers. 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, the student will be able to,  
CO1: Understand the process of voltage build-up in DC generators and characteristics.  
CO2: Understand the process of torque production, starting and speed control of DC motors  
          and illustrate their characteristics. 
CO3: Obtain the equivalent circuit of single-phase transformer and determine its efficiency    
          & regulation. 
CO4: Analyze the performance of Single- Phase Transformers  
CO4: Analyse various configurations of three-phase transformers. 
UNIT – I: DC Machines 
Introduction to DC machines (Construction and principle of operation of DC machines) – EMF 
equation for generator –Excitation techniques – characteristics of DC generators –applications of 
DC Generators, Back-emf and torque equations of DC motor- Characteristics of DC motors - 
Applications of DC motors – Armature reaction and commutation. 
 
UNIT – II: Starting, Speed Control and Testing of DC Machines 
Necessity of a starter – starting by 3-point and 4-point starters – speed control by armature 
voltage and field current control – Testing of DC machines, losses and efficiency – brake test, 
Swinburne’s test –Hopkinson’s test–Field Test. 
 
UNIT – III: Single-phase Transformers 
Introduction to single-phase Transformers (Construction and principle of operation) –emf 
equation – operation on no-load and on load –lagging, leading and unity power factor loads –
phasor diagrams– equivalent circuit –regulation – losses and efficiency – effect of variation of 
frequency and supply voltage on losses – auto transformer - all day efficiency.  
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
UNIT –IV: Testing of Transformers  
Open-Circuit and Short-Circuit tests – Sumpner’s test – separation of losses–– Parallel operation 
with equal and unequal voltage ratios –– equivalent circuit – comparison with two winding 
transformers. 
 
UNIT – V: Three-Phase Transformers: 
Polyphase connections- Y/Y, Y/Δ, Δ/Y, Δ/Δ, open Δ and Vector groups –  third harmonics in 
phase voltages– Parallel operation–three winding transformers- transients in switching –off load 
and on load tap changers–Scott connection. 
Textbooks: 
1. Electrical Machinery by Dr. P S Bimbhra, Fully Revised edition, Khanna Publishers, 
New Delhi,2021. 
2. Performance and analysis of AC machines by M.G. Say, CBS, 2002. 
Reference Books: 
1. Electrical Machines by D. P.Kothari, I .J .Nagarth, McGraw Hill Publications, 5th 
edition, 2017. 
2. Electrical Machinery Fundamentals by Stephen J Chapman McGraw Hill education 
2017 
3. Generalized Theory of Electrical Machines by Dr. P S Bimbhra, 7 th Edition, Khanna 
Publishers, 2021. 
4. Theory & Performance of Electrical Machines by J.B.Gupta, S.K.Kataria& 
Sons,2013. 
5. Electric Machinery by Fitzgerald, A.E.,Kingsley, Jr.,C.,& Umans, S. D, 7th edition, 
McGraw-Hill Education, 2014. 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105112 
2. nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105155
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
B. Tech-II Year – 
I SEMESTER PROFESSIONAL CORE L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
ELECTRICAL CIRCUIT ANALYSIS-II AND SIMULATION LAB 
 
Course Objectives: 
• To measure three phase Active and Reactive power  
• To analyse transient behaviour of circuits 
• To determine 2-port network parameters 
• To analyse electrical circuits using simulation tools 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, student will be able to,  
CO1: Understand the power calculations in three phase circuits. 
CO2: Evaluate the time response of given network.   
CO3: Evaluate two port network parameters.  
CO4: Simulate and analyse electrical circuits using suitable software. 
 
List of Experiments 
 
Any 10 of the following experiments are to be conducted: 
 
1. Measurement of Active Power and Reactive Power for balanced loads. 
2. Measurement of Active Power and Reactive Power for unbalanced loads. 
3. Determination of Z and Y parameters.  
4. Determination of ABCD and hybrid parameters 
5. Verification of Kirchhoff’s current law and voltage law using simulation tools. 
6. Verification of mesh and nodal analysis using simulation tools. 
7. Verification of super position and maximum power transfer theorems using simulation tools. 
8. Verification of Reciprocity and Compensation theorems using simulation tools. 
9. Verification of Thevenin’s and Norton’s theorems using simulation tools.  
10. Verification of series and parallel resonance using simulation tools.  
11. Simulation and analysis of transient response of RL, RC and RLC circuits. 
12. Verification of self-inductance and mutual inductance by using simulation tools. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B. Tech-II Year – 
I SEMESTER PROFESSIONAL CORE L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
DC MACHINES & TRANSFORMERS LAB 
 
Pre-requisite: Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion, Electromagnetic fields and 
Electrical Circuit Analysis. 
Course Objectives: 
The objectives of this course is 
• To conduct the experiment and plot the characteristics and applications of DC machines. 
• To perform the starting, speed control and testing methods of DC Machines. 
• To determine/Predetermine efficiency and regulation of the transformer through equivalent 
circuit. 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, the student will be able to, 
CO1:  Demonstrate starting and speed control methods of DC Machines. 
CO2: Apply theoretical concepts in analysing the performance characteristics of DC   
           Machines. 
CO3: Determine the performance characteristics of DC machines using different testing  
          methods. 
CO4: Determine the performance parameters of single-phase transformer. 
List of Experiments 
Any 10 of the following experiments are to be conducted: 
 
1. Speed control of DC shunt motor by Field Current and Armature Voltage Control. 
2. Brake test on DC shunt motor- Determination of performance curves. 
3. Swinburne’s test - Predetermination of efficiencies as DC Generator and Motor. 
4. Hopkinson’s test on DC Shunt Machines. 
5. Load test on DC compound generator-Determination of characteristics. 
6. Load test on DC shunt generator-Determination of characteristics. 
7. Fields test on DC series machines-Determination of efficiency. 
8. Brake test on DC compound motor-Determination of performance curves. 
9. OC & SC tests on single phase transformer. 
10. Sumpner’s test on single phase transformer. 
11. Scott connection of transformers. 
12. Parallel operation of Single-phase Transformers. 
13. Separation of core losses of a single-phase transformer. 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://ems-iitr.vlabs.ac.in/List%20of%20experiments.html 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B. Tech-II Year – 
I SEMESTER SKILL ENHANCEMENT COURSE L T P C 
0 1 2 1.5 
DATA STRUCTURES LAB 
 
Course Objectives: 
• To provide the knowledge of basic data structures and their implementations. 
• It Strengthen the ability of the student to identify and apply suitable data structures for 
the given problem. 
• To arrange the data using different types of sorting techniques. 
• To understand and design efficient programs for linear and non linear data structures as 
well as searching and sorting techniques. 
• To develop effective skills in the implementation of data structures. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
1. Analyze different searching and sorting Techniques. 
2. Analyze concepts of linked lists and with their implementation of different Linked Lists 
3. Apply the concepts of stacks and queues in real time applications 
4. Implement the non-linear data structures trees and their operations 
5. Implementation of Graphs with their applications. 
UNIT I: 
Introduction to Linear Data Structures: Definition and importance of linear data structures. 
Sorting Techniques: Bubble sort, Selection sort, Insertion Sort, merge Sort, Quick Sort 
  Searching Techniques: Linear & Binary Search 
Sample Experiments: 
1. Write a program that implements the following sorting methods to sort a given list of integers 
in ascending order i) Bubble sort  ii) Selection sort   iii) Insertion sort  
2. Write a program that implements the following sorting methods to sort a given list of integers 
in ascending order i)merge sort II)Quick sort. 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
3. Write a program that uses both recursive and non recursive functions to perform the 
following searching operations for a Key value in a given list of integers: i) Linear search ii) 
Binary search. 
 
UNIT II: 
Linked Lists: Singly linked lists, representation and operations, doubly linked lists and 
circular linked lists. 
 
Sample Experiments: 
1. Write a program that uses functions to perform the following operations on singly linked 
list: 
    i) Creation          ii) Insertion       iii) Deletion          iv) Traversal 
2. Write a program that uses functions to perform the following operations on Doubly 
linked list: 
    i) Creation       ii) Insertion       iii) Deletion             iv) Traversal 
3. Write a program that uses functions to perform the following operations on circular 
linked list:  
    i) Creation              ii) Insertion         iii) Deletion          iv) Traversal 
UNIT III: 
Stacks: Introduction to stacks: properties and operations, implementing stacks using arrays and 
linked lists.  
Queues: Introduction to queues: properties and operations, implementing queues using arrays 
and linked lists. 
Sample Experiments: 
1. Write a program that implement stack (its operations) using 
i) Arrays          ii) Linked lists 
2. Write a program that implement Queue (its operations) using 
     i) Arrays            ii) Linked lists  
UNIT IV: 
Trees: Introduction to Trees- what is Tree? Binary Tree, properties, Tree Traversals, Binary 
Search Tree – Insertion, Deletion & Traversals 
Sample Experiments: 
 
1. Write a program to implement the tree traversal methods. 
2. Write a program to perform the following operations:  
 a) Insert an element into a binary search tree. 
 b) Delete an element from a binary search tree.  
 c) Search for a key element in a binary search tree. 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT-V:  
GRAPHS: Basic concepts, Representations of Graphs: Adjacency list and Adjacency matrix, 
Graph Algorithms: Graph Traversals- BFS & DFS. 
 
Sample Experiments: 
1.  Write a program to implement the Breadth First traversal method. 
2. Write a program to implement the Depth First traversal method. 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Data Structures and algorithm analysis in C, Mark Allen Weiss, Pearson, 2nd Edition. 
2. Fundamentals of data structures in C, Ellis Horowitz, Sartaj Sahni, Susan Anderson-
Freed, Silicon Press, 2008 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Algorithms and Data Structures: The Basic Toolbox by Kurt Mehlhorn and Peter Sanders 
2. C Data Structures and Algorithms by Alfred V. Aho, Jeffrey D. Ullman, and John E. 
Hopcroft 
3. Problem Solving with Algorithms and Data Structures" by Brad Miller and David Ranum 
4. Introduction to Algorithms by Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. 
Rivest,                                                                                       and Clifford Stein. 
5. Algorithms in C, Parts 1-5 (Bundle): Fundamentals, Data Structures, Sorting, Searching, 
and Graph Algorithms" by Robert Sedgewick. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
• To make the students to get awareness on environment.  
• To understand the importance of protecting natural resources, ecosystems for future generations 
and pollution causes due to the day to day activities of human life  
• To save earth from the inventions by the engineers.  
 
UNIT I              
Multidisciplinary Nature of Environmental Studies: – Definition, Scope and Importance – Need for 
Public Awareness. 
Natural Resources:  Renewable and non-renewable resources – Natural resources and associated 
problems – Forest resources – Water resources – Mineral resources- Food resources –Land resources and 
Energy resources - Use and over exploitation, case studies.  
 
UNIT II             
Ecosystems: Concept of an ecosystem. – Structure and function of an ecosystem (Producers, consumers 
and decomposers), Energy flow in the ecosystem and ecological pyramids – Introduction, types, 
characteristic features of the following ecosystem: 
a. Forest ecosystem. 
b. Grassland ecosystem 
c. Desert ecosystem. 
d. Aquatic ecosystems (ponds, streams, lakes, rivers, oceans, estuaries) 
 
Biodiversity and its Conservation: Introduction - Definition: genetic, species and ecosystem diversity – 
Bio-geographical classification of India – Biodiversity at global, National and local levels – India as a 
mega-diversity nation – Hot-spots of biodiversity – Threats to biodiversity – Endangered and endemic 
species of India – Conservation of biodiversity: In-situ and Ex-situ conservation of biodiversity. 
 
UNIT III             
Environmental Pollution: Definition, Cause, effects and control measures of: 
a. Air Pollution. 
b. Water pollution 
c. Soil pollution 
d. Marine pollution 
e. Noise pollution 
f. Thermal pollution 
g. Nuclear hazards 
 
Solid Waste Management: Causes, effects and control measures of urban and industrial wastes – Role of 
an individual in prevention of pollution – Pollution case studies – Disaster management: floods, 
earthquake, cyclone and landslides.  
 
UNIT IV             
Social Issues and the Environment:  From Unsustainable to Sustainable development – Water 
conservation, rain water harvesting, watershed management – Environmental ethics:  Issues and possible 
solutions – Climate change, global warming, acid rain, ozone layer depletion, nuclear accidents and 
holocaust.  Case Studies – Environment Protection Act. – Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act. – 
Water (Prevention and control of Pollution) Act – Wildlife Protection Act – Forest Conservation Act. 
II Year-I Semester ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE 
L T P C 
2 0 0 - 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
UNIT V             
Human Population and the Environment: Population growth, variation among nations.  Population 
explosion – Family Welfare Programmes. – Environment and human health – Human Rights – Value 
Education – HIV/AIDS – Women and Child Welfare – Role of information Technology in Environment 
and human health – Case studies. 
Field Work: Visit to a local area to document environmental assets River/forest gr assland/hill/mountain 
– Visit to a local polluted site-Urban/Rural/Industrial/Agricultural Study of  common plants, insects, and 
birds – river, hill slopes, etc. 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Textbook of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses Erach Bharucha for University 
Grants Commission, Universities Press. 
2. Palaniswamy, <Environmental Studies=, Pearson education  
3. S.Azeem Unnisa, <Environmental Studies= Academic Publishing Company 
4. K.Raghavan Nambiar, <Text book of Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses as per 
UGC model syllabus=, Scitech Publications (India), Pvt. Ltd. 
 
References: 
 
1. Deeksha Dave and E.Sai Baba Reddy, <Textbook of Environmental Science=, Cengage 
Publications. 
2. M.Anji Reddy, <Text book of Environmental Sciences and Technology=, BS Publication. 
3. J.P.Sharma, Comprehensive Environmental studies,  Laxmi publications. 
4. J. Glynn Henry and Gary W. Heinke, <Environmental Sciences and Engineering=, Prentice hall of 
India Private limited 
5. G.R.Chatwal, <A Text Book of Environmental Studies= Himalaya Publishing House 
6. Gilbert M. Masters and Wendell P. Ela, <Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Science, 
Prentice hall of India Private limited. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
• To inculcate the basic knowledge of microeconomics and financial accounting 
• To make the students learn how demand is estimated for different products, input-output 
relationship for optimizing production and cost 
• To Know the Various types of market structure and pricing methods and strategy 
• To give an overview on investment appraisal methods to promote the students to learn 
how to plan long-term investment decisions. 
• To provide fundamental skills on accounting and to explain the process of preparing 
financial statements. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
• Define the concepts related to Managerial Economics, financial accounting and 
management(L2) 
• Understand the fundamentals of Economics viz., Demand, Production, cost, 
revenue and markets (L2) 
• Apply the Concept of Production cost and revenues for effective Business decision (L3) 
• Analyze how to invest their capital and maximize returns (L4) 
• Evaluate the capital budgeting techniques. (L5) 
• Develop the accounting statements and evaluate the financial performance of business 
entity (L5) 
 
UNIT - I Managerial Economics         
Introduction – Nature, meaning, significance, functions, and advantages. Demand-Concept, 
Function, Law of Demand - Demand Elasticity- Types – Measurement. Demand Forecasting- 
Factors governing Forecasting, Methods. Managerial Economics and Financial Accounting and 
Management. 
 
UNIT - II Production and Cost Analysis        
Introduction – Nature, meaning, significance, functions and advantages. Production Function – 
Least- cost combination – Short run and long run Production Function- Isoquants and Is costs, 
Cost & Break-Even Analysis - Cost concepts and Cost behaviour- Break-Even Analysis (BEA) - 
Determination of Break-Even Point (Simple Problems). 
 
UNIT - III Business Organizations and Markets       
Introduction – Forms of Business Organizations- Sole Proprietary - Partnership - Joint Stock 
Companies - Public Sector Enterprises. Types of Markets - Perfect and Imperfect Competition - 
Features of Perfect Competition Monopoly- Monopolistic Competition –Oligopoly-Price-Output 
Determination - Pricing Methods and Strategies 
 
 
 
II Year-I Semester 
MANAGERIAL ECONOMICS AND 
FINANCIAL ANALYSIS 
L T P C 
2 0 0 2 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT - IV Capital Budgeting          
Introduction – Nature, meaning, significance. Types of Working Capital, Components, Sources 
of Short-term and Long-term Capital, Estimating Working capital requirements. Capital 
Budgeting– Features, Proposals, Methods and Evaluation. Projects – Pay Back Method, 
Accounting Rate of Return (ARR) Net Present Value (NPV) Internal Rate Return (IRR) Method 
(sample problems) 
 
UNIT - V Financial Accounting and Analysis       
Introduction – Concepts and Conventions- Double-Entry Bookkeeping, Journal, Ledger, Trial 
Balance- Final Accounts (Trading Account, Profit and Loss Account and Balance Sheet with 
simple adjustments). Introduction to Financial Analysis - Analysis and Interpretation of Liquidity 
Ratios, Activity Ratios, and Capital structure Ratios and Profitability. 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Varshney & Maheswari: Managerial Economics, Sultan Chand. 
2. Aryasri: Business Economics and Financial Analysis, 4/e, MGH. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Ahuja Hl Managerial economics Schand. 
2. S.A. Siddiqui and A.S. Siddiqui: Managerial Economics and Financial Analysis, New 
Age International. 
3. Joseph G. Nellis and David Parker: Principles of Business Economics, Pearson, 2/e, New 
Delhi. 
4. Domnick Salvatore: Managerial Economics in a Global Economy, Cengage. 
 
Online Learning Resources:  
https://www.slideshare.net/123ps/managerial-economics-ppt 
https://www.slideshare.net/rossanz/production-and-cost-45827016 
https://www.slideshare.net/darkyla/business-organizations-19917607 
https://www.slideshare.net/balarajbl/market-and-classification-of-market 
https://www.slideshare.net/ruchi101/capital-budgeting-ppt-59565396 
https://www.slideshare.net/ashu1983/financial-accounting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B. Tech-II Year – 
II SEMESTER ENGINEERING SCIENCE / BASIC SCIENCE L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
ANALOG CIRCUITS 
 
Pre-requisite: Knowledge of electronic components and semiconductor devices, number 
systems, binary arithmetic, Boolean or switching algebra, and logic gates.  
Course Objectives: 
• To acquire the basic knowledge on clippers, clampers & biasing circuits. 
• To determine the h-parameters of a transistor circuit & understand the concepts of feedback 
amplifiers. 
• To know the operation of oscillators and operational amplifier. 
• To understand the applications of operational amplifier. 
• To acquire the knowledge on IC 555 timer and their applications and know the operation of 
Analog to Digital Converters and Digital to Analog Converters. 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, the student will be able to, 
CO1: Analyze diode clipping and clamping circuits. Understand different types of biasing 
circuits of a transistor. 
CO2: Use small signal modeling for transistor circuit analysis and illustrate the operation of 
feedback amplifiers. 
CO3: Understand operation of oscillators, operational amplifiers. 
CO4: Analyze the op-amp applications, comparators and wave form generators. 
CO5: Use 555 timers in multi-vibrators, Schmitt Trigger and PLL applications and describe the  
          operation of different ADC’s and DAC’s. 
Unit – 1:  
Diode clipping and clamping circuits: Diode Clippers-Positive and Negative clippers, Diode 
Clampers - Positive and Negative Clampers. Transfer characteristics of clippers and clampers. 
DC biasing of BJTs:  Load lines, Operating Point, Bias Stability, Collector-to-Base Bias, Self-
Bias, Stabilization against Variations in V BE and β for the Self -Bias Circuit, Bias Compensation, 
Thermal Runaway, Thermal Stability. 
 
Unit – II: 
Small Signals Modelling of BJT: Analysis of a Transistor Amplifier Circuit using h-
parameters, Simplified CE Hybrid Model, Analysis of CE, CC, CB Configuration using 
Approximate Model, Frequency Response of CE and CC amplifiers. 
 
Feedback Amplifiers: Classification of Amplifiers, the Feedback Concept, General 
Characteristics of Negative-Feedback Amplifiers, Effect of Negative Feedback upon Output and 
Input Resistances, Voltage-Series Feedback, Current-Series Feedback, Current-Shunt Feedbac k, 
Voltage-Shunt Feedback. 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Unit – III: 
Oscillator Circuits: Barkhausen Criterion of oscillation, Oscillator operation, R-C phase shift 
oscillator, Wien bridge Oscillator, Crystal Oscillator. 
Operational Amplifiers:  Introduction, Basic information of Op-Amp, Ideal Operational 
Amplifier, Block Diagram Representation of Typical Op-Amp, OP-Amps Characteristics: 
Introduction, DC and AC characteristics, 741 op-amp & its features. 
 
 
Unit – IV: 
OP-AMPS Applications: Introduction, Basic Op-Amp Applications, Instrumentation Amplifier, 
AC Amplifier, V to I and I to V Converter, Sample and Hold Circuit, Log and Antilog Amplifier, 
Multiplier and Divider, Differentiator, integrator. 
Comparators and Waveform Generators: Introduction, Comparator, Square Wave Generator, 
Monostable Multivibrator, Triangular Wave Generator, Sine Wave Generators.  
 
Unit – V: 
Timers and Phase Locked Loop:  Introduction to 555 timer, functional diagram, Monostable 
and Astable operations and applications, Schmitt Trigger, PLL block schematic, principles and 
description of individual blocks, 565 PLL, Applications of VCO (566). 
Digital to Analog and Analog to Digital Converters: Introduction, basic DAC techniques, 
weighted resistor DAC, R-2R ladder DAC, inverted R-2R DAC, A-D Converters – parallel 
Comparator type ADC, counter type ADC, successive approximation ADC and dual slope ADC, 
DAC and ADC Specifications. 
Textbooks: 
1. Electronic Devices and Circuits- J. Millman, C.Halkias, Tata Mc-Graw Hill, 4 th Edition, 
2015. 
2. Linear Integrated Circuits – D. Roy Choudhury, New Age International (p) Ltd, 5th  
Edition, 2018.  
Reference Books: 
1. Electronic Devices and Circuit Theory – Robert L.Boylestad and Lowis Nashelsky, 
Pearson Edition, 2021. 
2. Electronic Devices and Circuits–G.K. Mithal, Khanna Publisher, 23rd Edition, 2017. 
3. Electronic Devices and Circuits – David Bell, Oxford Publications, 2010. 
4. Electronic Principles –Malvino, Albert Paul, and David J. Bates, McGraw-Hill/Higher 
Education, 9th Edition 2021.. 
5. Operational Amplifiers and Linear Integrated Circuits– Gayakwad R.A, Pearson,4th 
edition, 2021. 
6. Operational Amplifiers and Linear Integrated Circuits –Sanjay Sharma, Kataria& Sons, 
2ndEdition, 2010. 
 Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/122106025. 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108102112.  
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B. Tech-II Year – 
II SEMESTER PROFESSIONAL CORE L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
POWER SYSTEMS - I 
 
Pre-requisite: Fundamentals of Basic Electrical Engineering and electrical materials. 
Course Objectives: 
• To study the principle of operation of different components of a hydro and thermal power 
stations. 
• To study principle of operation of different components of a nuclear power stations.  
• To study construction and operation of different components of an Air and Gas Insulated 
substations. 
• To study different types of cables and distribution systems. 
• To study different types of load curves and tariffs applicable to consumers. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, the student will be able to, 
CO1: Understand the different types of power plants, operation of hydroelectric and thermal  
power plants. 
  CO2: Understand the operation of nuclear power plants. 
CO3: Describe the different components of air and gas insulated substations. 
CO4: Discuss the construction of single core and three core cables and describe distribution 
system configurations. 
CO5: Analyse different economic factors of power generation and tariffs. 
 
Unit I:  
Hydroelectric Power Stations: 
Selection of site, general layout of a hydroelectric power plant with brief description of major 
components and principle of operation 
  
Thermal Power Stations: 
Selection of site, general layout of a thermal power plant. Brief description of components: 
boilers, super heaters, economizers and electrostatic precipitators, steam turbines: impulse and 
reaction turbines, condensers, feed water circuit, cooling towers and chimney. 
 
Unit II:  
Nuclear Power Stations: 
Location of nuclear power plant, working principle, nuclear fission, nuclear fuels, nuclear chain 
reaction, nuclear reactor components: moderators, control rods, reflectors and coolants, types of 
nuclear reactors and brief description of PWR, BWR and FBR. Radiation: radiation hazards and 
shielding, nuclear waste disposal. 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Unit III: Substations: 
Air Insulated Substations – indoor & outdoor substations, substations layouts of 33/11 kV 
showing the location of all the substation equipment. Bus bar arrangements in the sub-stations: 
simple arrangements like single bus bar, sectionalized single bus bar, double bus bar with one and 
two circuit breakers, main and transfer bus bar system with relevant diagrams. 
Gas Insulated Substations (GIS) – advantages of gas insulated substations, constructional 
aspects of GIS, comparison of air insulated substations and gas insulated substations 
Unit IV:  
Underground Cables: 
Types of cables, construction, types of insulating materials, calculation of insulation resistance, 
stress in insulation and power factor of cable. Cap acitance of single and 3-Core belted Cables. 
Grading of cables: capacitance grading and intersheath grading.  
Distribution Systems: 
Classification of Distribution systems, A.C Distrib ution, overhead versus Underground system, 
Connection schemes of Distribution system, Requirements of Distribution system, requirements of a 
Distribution system, Design considerations in Distribution system. 
UNIT V:   Economic Aspects & Tariff: 
 Economic Aspects – load curve, load duration and integrated load duration curves, discussion 
on economic aspects: connected load, maximum demand, demand factor, load factor, diversity 
factor, plant capacity factor and plant use factor, base and peak load plants. 
Tariff Methods– Costs of generation and their division into fixed, semi-fixed and running costs, 
desirable characteristics of a tariff method, tariff methods: simple rate, flat rate, block-rate, two-
part, three–part, and power factor tariff methods. 
 
Text Books: 
1. I.J. Nagarath & D.P. Kothari, Power System Engineering, McGraw-Hill Education, 3 rd 
Edition, 2019. 
2. C.L.Wadhwa, Generation, Distribution and Utilization of Electrical Energy, New Age 
International Publishers, 6th Edition, 2018. 
3. Turan Gonen, Electric Power Distribution System Engineering, McGraw-Hill, 3 rd edition 
2014. 
 Reference Books: 
1. S. N. Singh, Electric Power Generation, Transmission and Distribution, PHI Learning Pvt 
Ltd, New Delhi, 2nd Edition, 2010 
2. J.B.Gupta, Transmission and Distribution of Electrical Power, S.K.Kataria and sons,10 th 
Edition, 2012 
3. V. K. Mehta and Rohit Mehta, Principles of Power System, S. Chand, 4th Edition, 2005. 
4. Handbook of Switchgear, BHEL, McGraw-Hill Education, 2007. 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108102047 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B. Tech-II Year – 
II SEMESTER PROFESSIONAL CORE L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
INDUCTION AND SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES 
Pre-requisite: Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion, Electromagnetic fields and 
Transformers. 
Course Objectives: 
Students will get exposure to understand the concepts of  
• operation and performance of three phase induction motor 
• performance of induction motor and their performance parameters. 
• torque producing mechanism of single phase induction motor  
• performance parameters of synchronous generators  
• operation performance and starting methods of synchronous motors 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, the student will be able to, 
CO1: Explain the construction and operation of three-phase induction motor. 
CO2: Analyse the performance of three-phase induction motor. 
CO3: Describe the working of single-phase induction motors. 
CO4: Analyse the performance of Synchronous generators 
CO5: Analyse the performance of Synchronous motors 
 
UNIT-I: 3-phase induction motors 
 
Introduction to 3-phase induction motors (Construction of Squirrel cage and Slipring induction 
motors)– production of rotating magnetic field – principle of operation – rotor emf and rotor 
frequency – rotor current and power factor at standstill and during running conditions – rotor 
power input, rotor copper loss and mechanical power developed and their inter-relationship –
equivalent circuit – phasor diagram 
 
UNIT-II: Performance of 3-Phase induction motors 
 
Torque equation – expressions for maximum torque and starting torque – torque-slip 
characteristics – double cage and deep bar rotors –No load, Brake test and Blocked rotor tests – 
circle diagram for predetermination of performance- methods of starting –starting current and 
torque calculations -speed control of induction motor with V/f control method, rotor resistance 
control and rotor emf injection technique –crawling and cogging – induction generator operation. 
 
UNIT – III: Single- Phase Motors 
Single phase induction motors – constructional features – double revolving field theory, Cross 
field theory – equivalent circuit- starting methods: capacitor start capacitor run, capacitor start 
induction run, split phase & shaded pole, AC series motor. 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT–IV: Synchronous Generator 
Constructional features of non-salient and salient pole type alternators- armature windings – 
distributed and concentrated windings – distribution& pitch factors – E.M.F equation –armature 
reaction – voltage regulation by synchronous impedance method – MMF method and Potier 
triangle method –two reaction analysis of salient pole machines -methods of synchronization- 
Slip test – Parallel operation of alternators. 
 
UNIT–V: Synchronous Motor 
Synchronous motor principle and theory of operation – Effect of excitation on current and power 
factor– synchronous condenser –expression for power developed –hunting and its suppression – 
methods of starting. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Electrical Machinery, Dr. P.S. Bhimbra,  Khanna Publishing, 2021,First Edition.  
2. Performance and analysis of AC machines by M.G. Say, CBS, 2002. 
Reference Books: 
1. Electrical machines, D.P. Kothari and I.J. Nagrath , McGraw Hill Education, 2017, 
Fifth Edition.  
2. Theory & Performance of Electrical Machines by J.B.Gupta, S.K.Kataria & Sons, 
2013. 
3. Electric Machinery, A.E.Fitzgerald, Charles kingsley, Stephen D.Umans,  McGraw-
Hill, 2020, Seventh edition. 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105131 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108106072 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B. Tech-II Year – 
II SEMESTER PROFESSIONAL CORE L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
CONTROL SYSTEMS 
 Pre-requisite: Basic Engineering Mathematics 
 
Course Objectives: 
• To obtain the mathematical models of physical systems and derive transfer function. 
• To determine the time response of systems and analyse system stability. 
• To analyse system stability using frequency response methods. 
• To design compensators using Bode diagrams. 
• To obtain the mathematical models of physical systems using state space approach and 
determine the response. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course, the student will be able to, 
CO1: Derive the transfer function of physical systems and determine overall transfer    
            function using block diagram algebra and signal flow graphs. 
CO2: Obtain the time response of first and specifications of second order systems and    
          determine error constants. Analyze the absolute and relative stability of LTI systems       
           using Routh’s stability criterion and root locus method. 
CO3: Analyze the stability of LTI systems using frequency response methods. 
CO4: Design Lag, Lead, Lag-Lead compensators to improve system performance using   
           Bode Diagrams. 
CO5: Apply state space analysis concepts to represent physical systems as state models,  
         derive transfer function and determine the response. Understand the concepts of  
         controllability and observability 
 
UNIT - I 
Mathematical Modelling of Control Systems 
Classification of control systems - open loop and closed loop control systems and their 
differences - Feedback characteristics - transfer function of linear system, differential equations 
of electrical networks- translational and rotational mechanical systems-  block diagram reduction 
techniques – representation by signal flow graph – reduction using Mason’s gain formula. 
 
UNIT - II 
Time Response Analysis:  
Standard test signals – time response of first and second order systems – time domain 
specifications - steady state errors and error constants - effects of proportional (P) - proportional 
integral (PI) - proportional derivative (PD) proportional integral derivative (PID) systems. 
 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Stability And Root Locus Technique: 
The concept of stability – Routh’s stability criterion – limitations of Routh’s stability, root locus 
concept – construction of root loci (simple problems) - Effect of addition of Poles and Zeros to 
the transfer function. 
 
UNIT – III: Frequency Response Analysis 
Introduction to frequency domain specifications – Bode diagrams – transfer function from the 
Bode diagram –Polar plots, Nyquist stability criterion- stability analysis using Bode plots (phase 
margin and gain margin). 
UNIT – IV: Classical Control Design Techniques 
Lag, lead, lag-lead compensators - physical realization - design of compensators using Bode 
plots. 
  
UNIT – V: State Space Analysis of LTI Systems 
Concepts of state - state variables and state model - state space representation of transfer 
function: Controllable Canonical Form - Observable Canonical Form - Diagonal Canonical Form 
- diagonalization using linear transformation - solving the time invariant state equations State 
Transition Matrix and its properties- concepts of controllability and observability. 
Text Books: 
1. Modern Control Engineering by Kotsuhiko Ogata, Prentice Hall of India, 5 th edition, 
2015. 
2. Automatic control systems by Benjamin C.Kuo, Prentice Hall of  India, 9th  Edition,2014.  
Reference Books: 
1. Control Systems principles and design by M.Gopal, Tata Mc Graw Hill education Pvt 
Ltd., 4th Edition. 
2. Control Systems Engineering by Norman S. Nise, Wiley Publications, 7th edition 
3. Control Systems by Manik Dhanesh N, Cengage publications.  
4. Control Systems Engineering by I.J.Nagarath and M.Gopal, Newage International 
Publications, 5th Edition. 
5. Control Systems Engineering by S.Palani, Tata Mc Graw Hill Publications. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. 
https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/107/106/107106081/ 
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/106/108106098/ 
3. https://nptelvideos.com/video.php?id=1423&c=14 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B. Tech-II Year – 
II SEMESTER PROFESSIONAL CORE L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
INDUCTION AND SYNCHRONOUS MACHINES LAB 
 
Pre-requisite: Principles of Electromechanical Energy Conversion, Electromagnetic fields. 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objectives of this course is 
• To apply the concepts of speed control methods in 3-phase Induction Motor. 
• To experimentally develop circle diagram and obtain equivalent circuit to analyse the 
performance of 3-phase induction motor 
• To apply the concepts of power factor improvement on single phase Induction Motor 
• To perform various testing methods on alternators for experimentally predetermine the 
regulation 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, the student will be able to,   
CO1: Analyse the speed control methods on 3-phase Induction Motor. 
CO2: Evaluate the performance of 3-phase Induction Motor by obtaining the locus diagram  
          and equivalent circuit of 3-phase Induction Motor 
CO3:  Adapt the power factor improvement methods for single phase Induction Motor 
CO4: Pre-determine the regulation of 3-phase alternator 
CO5: Determine the synchronous machine reactance of 3-phase alternator 
 
List of Experiments 
Any 10 experiments of the following are required to be conducted  
1. Brake test on three phase induction motor. 
2. Circle diagram of three phase induction motor. 
3. Speed control of three phase induction motor by V/f method. 
4. Equivalent circuit of single-phase induction motor. 
5. Power factor improvement of single-phase induction motor by using capacitors. 
6. Load test on single phase induction motor. 
7. Regulation of a three -phase alternator by synchronous impedance. 
8. Regulation of a three -phase alternator by MMF method. 
9. Regulation of three-phase alternator by Potier triangle method. 
10. V and Inverted V curves of a three-phase synchronous motor. 
11. Determination of Xd, Xq & Regulation of a salient pole synchronous generator. 
12. Determination of efficiency of three phase alternator by loading with three phase 
induction motor. 
13. Parallel operation of three-phase alternator under no-load and load conditions. 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. 
https://em-coep.vlabs.ac.in/List%20of%20experiments.html 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B. Tech-II Year – 
II SEMESTER PROFESSIONAL CORE L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
CONTROL SYSTEMS LAB 
 
Pre-requisite: Basic Engineering Mathematics and Fundamentals of MATLAB. 
Course Objectives:  
• To impart hands on experience to understand the performance of basic control system 
components such as magnetic amplifiers, D.C. servo motors, A.C. Servo motors and 
Synchro’s.  
• To understand time and frequency responses of control system with and without 
controllers and compensators.  
• To know the different logic gates and Boolean expressions using PLC. 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, the student will be able to,   
CO1: Analyse the time response of system (first order and second order system).  
CO2: Design of PID controllers and compensators. 
CO3: Determine the transfer function of D.C Motor  
CO4: Judge the stability in time and frequency domain and Kalman’s test for controllability   
          and observability 
CO5: Analyse the potentiometer and determine the state space analysis concepts to represent     
physical systems as state models in MATLAB                                 
List of Experiments 
Any 10 of the following experiments are to be conducted:  
 
1. Analysis of First order system in time domain (For Step, Ramp Inputs) 
2.  Analysis of Second order system in time domain (For Step, Ramp Inputs) 
3. Effect of P, PD, PI, PID Controller on a second order systems 
4. Design of Lag Compensation - Magnitude and phase plot 
5. Design of Lead Compensation - Magnitude and phase plot 
6. Transfer function of DC Motor 
7. Stability analysis of Linear Time Invariant system using Root Locus Technique (MATLAB) 
8. Stability analysis of Linear Time Invariant system using Bode Plot Technique (MATLAB) 
9. Stability analysis of Linear Time Invariant system using Nyquist Plot Technique 
(MATLAB) 
10. Kalman’s test of Controllability and Observability using MATLAB. 
11. Potentiometer as an error detector 
12. State space model for classical transfer function using MATLAB. 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B. Tech-II Year – 
II SEMESTER SKILL ENHANCEMENT CORE L T P C 
0 1 2 2 
PYTHON PROGRAMMING LAB  
 
Pre-requisite:  Fundamentals of Programming Language 
 
Course Objectives: 
The main objectives of the course are to 
• Introduce core programming concepts of Python programming language.  
• Apply built-In functions, strings and lists 
• Demonstrate about Python data structures like Lists, Tuples, Sets and dictionaries  
• Implement Modules and Regular Expressions in Python Programming and to create 
practical and contemporary applications  
• Apply basic functional data science programming with python 
Course Outcomes: 
 The student will be able to  
• Understand core concepts of python programming and conditional control statements. 
• Usage of functions, strings and Lists. 
• Create built in functions, dictionaries and Tuple operations 
• Access files and modules in object-oriented programming  
• Create the different types of data formats for storing and transmitting information  
 
UNTI-I: 
History of Python Programming Language, Thrust Areas of Python, Installing Anaconda Python 
Distribution, Installing and Using Jupyter Notebook. 
 
Parts of Python Programming Language:  Identifiers, Keywords, Statements and Expressions, 
Variables, Operators, Precedence and Associativity, Data Types, Indentation, Comments, 
Reading Input, Print Output, Type Conversions, the type () Function and Is Operator, Dynamic 
and Strongly Typed Language.  
Control Flow Statements: if statement, if-else statement, if-elif-else, Nested if statement, while 
Loop, for Loop, continue and break Statements, Catching Exceptions Using try and except 
Statement. 
 
Sample Experiments: 
1. Write a program to find the largest element among three Numbers.  
2. Write a Program to display all prime numbers within an interval  
3. Write a program to swap two numbers without using a temporary variable.  
4. Demonstrate the following Operators in Python with suitable examples.  
i) Arithmetic Operators ii) Relational Operators iii) Assignment Operators iv) Logical 
Operators v) Bit wise Operators vi) Ternary Operator vii) Membership Operators viii) 
Identity Operators 
5. Write a program to add and multiply complex numbers 
6. Write a program to print multiplication table of a given number. 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT-II: 
Functions: Built-In Functions, Commonly Used Modules, Function Definition and Calling the 
function, return Statement and void Function, Scope and Lifetime of Variables, Default 
Parameters, Keyword Arguments, *args and **kwargs, Command Line Arguments.  
Strings: Creating and Storing Strings, Basic String Operations, Accessing Characters in String 
by Index Number, String Slicing and Joining, String Methods, Formatting Strings. 
Lists: Creating Lists, Basic List Operations, Indexing and Slicing in Lists, Built-In Functions 
Used on Lists, List Methods, del Statement. 
 
Sample Experiments: 
1. Write a program to define a function with multiple return values.  
2. Write a program to define a function using default arguments. 
3. Write a program to find the length of the string without using any library functions. 
4. Write a program to check if the substring is present in a given string or not.  
5. Write a program to perform the given operations on a list:  
i. addition     ii. insertion     iii. slicing  
6. Write a program to perform any 5 built-in functions by taking any list. 
 
 
UNIT-III: 
Dictionaries: Creating Dictionary, Accessing and Modifying key: value Pairs in Dictionaries, 
Built-In Functions Used on Dictionaries, Dictionary Methods, del Statement. 
Tuples and Sets:  Creating Tuples, Basic Tuple Operations, tuple () Function, Indexing and 
Slicing in Tuples, Built-In Functions Used on Tuples, Relation between Tuples and Lists, 
Relation between Tuples and Dictionaries, using zip () Function, Sets, Set Methods, Frozenset () 
 
Sample Experiments: 
1. Write a program to create tuples (name, age, address, college) for at least two members and 
concatenate the tuples and print the concatenated tuples.  
2. Write a program to count the number of vowels in a string (No control flow allowed). 
3. Write a program to check if a given key exists in a dictionary or not.  
4. Write a program to add a new key-value pair to an existing dictionary. 
5. Write a program to sum all the items in a given dictionary. 
 
  
UNIT-IV: 
Files: Types of Files, Creating and Reading Text Data, File Methods to Read and Write Data, 
Reading and Writing Binary Files, Pickle Module, Reading and Writing CSV Files, Python os 
and os.path Modules. 
Object-Oriented Programming:  Classes and Objects, Creating Classes in Python, Creating 
Objects in Python, Constructor Method, Classes with Multiple Objects, Class Attributes Vs Data 
Attributes, Encapsulation, Inheritance, Polymorphism. 
 
 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
Sample Experiments: 
1. Write a program to sort words in a file and put them in another file. The output file   
 should have only lower-case words, so any upper-case words from source must be 
lowered. 
2. Python program to print each line of a file in reverse order.  
3. Python program to compute the number of characters, words and lines in a file. 
4. Write a program to create, display, append, insert and reverse the order of the items in 
the array. 
5. Write a program to add, transpose and multiply two matrices.  
6. Write a Python program to create a class that represents a shape. Include methods to 
calculate its area and perimeter. Implement subclasses for different shapes like circle, 
triangle, and square. 
 
UNIT-V: 
Introduction to Data Science: Functional Programming, JSON and XML in Python, NumPy with 
Python, Pandas. 
 
Sample Experiments: 
1. Python program to check whether a JSON string contains complex object or not. 
2. Python Program to demonstrate NumPy arrays creation using array () function. 
3. Python program to demonstrate use of ndim, shape, size, dtype.  
4. Python program to demonstrate basic slicing, integer and Boolean indexing.  
5. Python program to find min, max, sum, cumulative sum of array 
6. Create a dictionary with at least five keys and each key represent value as a list where 
this list contains at least ten values and convert this dictionary as a pandas data frame and 
explore the data through the data frame as follows: 
a) Apply head () function to the pandas data frame 
b) Perform various data selection operations on Data Frame  
7. Select any two columns from the above data frame, and observe the change in one 
attribute with respect to other attribute with scatter and plot operations in matplotlib 
Reference Books: 
1. Gowri Shankar S, Veena A., Introduction to Python Programming, CRC Press.  
2. Python Programming, S Sridhar, J Indumathi, V M Hariharan, 2nd Edition, Pearson, 2024 
3. Introduction to Programming Using Python, Y. Daniel Liang, Pearson. 
 
Online Learning Resources/Virtual Labs: 
1. https://www.coursera.org/learn/python-for-applied-data-science-ai 
2. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/106106182 
 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objective of this course is to familiarize students with design thinking process as a tool for 
breakthrough innovation. It aims to equip students with design thinking skills and ignite the 
minds to create innovative ideas, develop solutions for real-time problems. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
• Define the concepts related to design thinking. (L1, L2)                   
• Explain the fundamentals of Design Thinking and innovation (L1, L2) 
• Apply the design thinking techniques for solving problems in various sectors. (L3) 
• Analyse to work in a multidisciplinary environment (L4) 
• Evaluate the value of creativity (L5) 
• Formulate specific problem statements of real time issues (L3, L6) 
 
UNIT I Introduction to Design Thinking       
Introduction to elements and principles of Design, basics of design-dot, line, shape, form as 
fundamental design components. Principles of design. Introduction to design thinking, history of 
Design Thinking, New materials in Industry. 
 
UNIT II Design Thinking Process        
Design thinking process (empathize, analyze, idea & prototype), implementing the process in 
driving inventions, design thinking in social innovations. Tools of design thinking - person, 
costumer, journey map, brainstorming, product development 
Activity: Every student presents their idea in three minutes, Every student can present design 
process in the form of flow diagram or flow chart etc. Every student should explain about 
product development. 
 
UNIT III Innovation          
Art of innovation, Difference between innovation and creativity, role of creativity and innovation 
in organizations- Creativity to Innovation- Teams for innovation- Measuring the impact and 
value of creativity. 
Activity: Debate on innovation and creativity, Flow and planning from idea to innovation, 
Debate on value-based innovation. 
 
UNIT IV Product Design         
Problem formation, introduction to product design, Product strategies, Product value, Product 
planning, product specifications- Innovation towards product design- Case studies 
Activity: Importance of modelling, how to set specifications, Explaining their own product 
design.  
 
 
 
II Year-II Semester DESIGN THINKING & INNOVATION 
L T P C 
1 0 2 2 
 
R-23 Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING 
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM(A) 
JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT V Design Thinking in Business Processes       
Design Thinking applied in Business & Strategic Innovation, Design Thinking principles that 
redefine business – Business challenges: Growth, Predictability, Change, Maintaining 
Relevance, Extreme competition, Standardization. Design thinking to meet corporate needs- 
Design thinking for Startups- Defining and testing Business Models and Business Cases- 
Developing & testing prototypes. 
Activity: How to market our own product, About maintenance, Reliability and plan for startup.  
 
Textbooks:  
1. Tim Brown, Change by design,  Harper Bollins (2009)  
2. Idris Mootee, Design Thinking for Strategic Innovation, 2013, John Wiley & Sons. 
 
Reference Books:  
1. David Lee, Design Thinking in the Classroom, Ulysses press  
2. Shrutin N Shetty, Design the Future, Norton Press  
3. William Lidwell, Universal Principles of Design-  Kritinaholden, Jill Butter.  
4. Chesbrough. H, The Era of Open Innovation – 2013 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
• https://nptel.ac.in/courses/110/106/110106124/ 
• https://nptel.ac.in/courses/109/104/109104109/ 
• https://swayam.gov.in/nd1_noc19_mg60/preview 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B.Tech. III Year-I Semester 
 
S.No Category Course 
Code Title L T P C 
1 PC  Power Electronics 3 0 0 3 
2 PC  Digital Circuits 3 0 0 3 
3 PC  Power Systems-II 3 0 0 3 
4 PCE-1  
1. Signals and Systems 
2. Computer Architecture andOrganization 
3. Communication systems 
3 0 0 3 
5 OE-1  
1. Renewable Energy Sources 
2. Electrical Machine Design 
3. Intelligent Control Systems 
3 0 0 3 
6 PC Lab-1  Power Electronics Lab 0 0 3 1.5 
7 PC Lab-2  Analog and Digital Circuits Lab 0 0 3 1.5 
8 SEC  Soft Skills 0 1 2 2 
9 ES  Tinkering Lab 0 0 2 1 
10 Internship  
Evaluation of Community Service Project 
Internship 
(Done during II-II Summer Vacation – 8 
Weeks) 
0 0 0 2 
11 MC  Technical Paper Writing & IPR 2 0 0 0 
Total 17 1 10 23 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Professional Core L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Power Electronics 
 
Pre-requisite: 
Electrical Circuit Analysis, Semiconductor Physics, Control Systems 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To know the characteristics of various power semiconductor devices.  
 To learn the operation of single phase controlled converters and perform harmonic analysis of input current. 
 To learn the operation of three phase-controlled converters and AC/AC converters. 
 To learn the operation of different types of DC-DC converters and control techniques. 
 To learn the operation of PWM inverters for voltage control and harmonic mitigation. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Illustrate the static and dynamic characteristics of SCR, Power-MOSFET and Power-IGBT. 
CO2: Analyse the operation of phase-controlled rectifiers. 
CO3: Analyse the operation of three-phase full –wave converters, AC Voltage Controllers and 
Cycloconverters. 
CO4: Examine the operation and design of different types of DC-DC converters. 
CO5: Analyse the operation of Square waveinverters and PWM inverters for voltage control. 
 
UNIT – I 
Power Semi-Conductor Devices 
Silicon controlled rectifier (SCR) – Two transistor analogy - Static and Dynamic characteristics – Turn on and Turn 
off Methods - Triggering Methods (R, RC and UJT) – Snubber circuit design. 
Static and Dynamic Characteristics of Power MOSFET and Power IGBT-Numerical problems. 
 
UNIT – II 
Single-phase AC-DC Converters  
Single-phase half-wave controlled rectifiers - R and RL l oads with and without freewheeling diode - Single-phase 
fully controlled mid-point and  bridge converter with R load , RL load and RLE load - Continuous and 
Discontinuous conduction - Effect of source inductance in Single -phase fully controlled bridge rectifier – 
Expression for output voltages – Single-phase Semi-Converter with R load-RL load and RLE l oad – Continuous 
and Discontinuous conduction - Dual converter and its mode of operation - Numerical Problems. 
 
UNIT – III 
Three-phase AC-DC Converters & AC – AC Converters 
Three-phase half-wave Rectifier with R and RL load - T hree-phase fully controlled rectifier with R and RL lo ad - 
Three-phase semi converter with R and RL load - Expression for Output Voltage - Numerical Problems. 
Single-phase AC-AC power control by phase control with R and  RL loads - Expression for rms output voltage – 
Single-phase step down and step up Cycloconverter - Numerical Problems. 
 
UNIT – IV 
DC–DC Converters 
Operation of Basic Chopper – Analysis of Buck, Boost and Buck-Boost converters in Continuous C onduction 
Mode (CCM) and Discontinuous Conduction Modes (DCM) - Output voltage equat ions using volt-sec balance in 
CCM & DCM – Expressions for output voltage ripple and inductor current ripple – control techniques – 
Introduction to PWM control -Numerical Problems. 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT – V 
DC–AC Converters 
Introduction - Single-phase half-bridge and full-bridge inverters with R and RL loads – Phase Displacement 
Control – PWM with bipolar voltage switching, PWM with unipolar volta ge switching - Three-phase square wave 
inverters - 1200 conduction and 1800 conduction modes of operation - Sinusoidal Pulse Width Modulation - Current 
Source Inverter (CSI) - Numerical Problems. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Power Electronics: Converters, Applications and Design by Ned Mohan , Tore M Undeland, William P 
Robbins, John Wiley & Sons, 2002.  
2. Power Electronics: Circuits, Devices and Applications – by M. H. Rashid, Prentice Hall of India, 2 nd 
edition, 2017. 
3. Power Electronics: Essentials & Applications by L.Umanand, Wiley, Pvt. Limited, India, 2009. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Elements of Power Electronics–Philip T.Krein. Oxford University Press; Second edition, 2014.  
2. Power Electronics – by P.S.Bhimbra, Khanna Publishers. 
3. Thyristorised Power Controllers – by G. K. Dubey, S. R. Doradla, A. Joshi and R. M. K.Sinh a, New   Age 
International (P) Limited Publishers, 1996. 
4. Power Electronics: by Daniel W.Hart, Mc Graw Hill, 2011. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/6-334-power-electronics-spring-2007 
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/101/108101126 
 
 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Professional Core L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Digital Circuits 
 
Pre-requisite:  
Knowledge of electronic components and semiconductor devices, nu mber systems,binary arithmetic, 
Boolean or switching algebra and logic gates.  
 
Course Objectives: 
 To know the simplification methods of Boolean functions 
 To understand the realization of arithmetic, data routing and memory logic circuits. 
 To know the operation and design of various counters and registers. 
 To understand the analysis and design of synchronous sequential circuits. 
 To understand the basic concepts of digital integrated circuits. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, the student will be able to, 
CO1: Use the concepts of Boolean algebra, K-map, tabulation method in minimization of  
      switching functions and able to design the arithmetic combinational circuits. 
CO2: Realize different types of data routing combinational circuits and PLDs. 
CO3: Apply knowledge of flip-flops in designing of registers and counters. 
CO4: Analyze synchronous sequential circuits and apply differe nt methods for the design of  
      synchronous sequential circuits. 
CO5: Understand the logic families in the form of digital integrated circuits. 
 
 
UNIT – I:  
Combinational logic circuits – I  
Definition of combinational logic, canonical forms, Gener ation of switching equations from truth tables, 
simplification of logic functions using Boolean theorems , NAND and NOR implementations, Karnaugh 
maps – 3 and 4variables, Incompletely specified functions (Don8t ca re terms) , Simplifying Max term 
equations, Quine-McCluskey minimization technique, General approa ch to combinational logic design, 
Look ahead carry adder, Cascading full adders, 4-bit adder-subtractor circuit, BCD adder circuit, Excess 3 
adder, Binary comparators. 
 
UNIT – II:  
Combinational logic circuits – II  
Decoders, BCD decoders, 7 segment decoder,higher order decoder, multiplexer,higher order multiplexing, 
de-multiplexers,higher order de-multiplexing, realization of Boolean functions using decoders, 
multiplexers, encoders, priority encoder, Read only and Read/ Write Memories, Programmable ROM, 
PAL, PLA-Basics structures, programming tables of PROM, PAL, PLA, realization of Boolean functions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Unit – III  
Sequential logic circuits   
Timing considerations of flip-flops, master-slave flip-fl op, edge triggered flip-flops, characteristic 
equations, flip-flops with reset and clear terminals, ex citation tables,conversion from one flip-flop to 
another flip-flop, design of asynchronous and synchronous counters, design of modulus-N counters, 
Johnson counter, ring counter, design of registers - bu ffer register, control buffer register, shift register , 
bi-directional shift register, universal shift register. 
 
UNIT – IV  
Sequential Circuit Design 
Mealy and Moore models, State machine notation, Synchrono us Sequential circuit analysis, Construction 
of state diagrams, Analysis of clocked sequential circuits, realization of sequence detector circuit, state 
reduction and assignments, design procedure. 
 
UNIT – V  
Digital integrated circuits:  
Logic levels, propagation delay time, powerdissipation, fan -out and fan-in, noise margin, logic families – 
RTL and DTL Circuits,TTL, Emitter-Coupled Logic, Metal-Oxide Semiconductor, Complementary MOS, 
CMOS Transmission Gate Circuits (Elementary approach only). 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Switching and finite automata theory Zvi. Kohavi, 3rd edition, Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
2. M. Morris Mano and M. D. Ciletti, <Digital Design=, 4th Edition, Pearson Education,2006.  
 
Reference Books: 
1. Fundamentals of Logic Design by Charles H. Roth Jr, Jaico Publishers, 5th Edition, 1992. 
2. Switching Theory and Logic Design by A. Anand Kumar,Prentic e Hall India Pvt., Limited, Third 
Edition, 2016. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117106086.  
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105113. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER 
Professional Core L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Power Systems-II 
 
Pre-requisite: 
Power systems-I, Electrical circuit Analysis. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To understand the concepts of GMD&GMR to compute inductance&cap acitance of 
transmission lines.  
 To distinguish the models of short, medium and long length t ransmission lines and 
analyze their performance. 
 To learn the effect of travelling waves on transmission li nes with different terminal 
conditions.  
 To learn the concepts of corona, the factors effecting corona and effects of transmission 
lines. 
 To design the sag and tension of transmission lines as well as to learn the performance of 
line insulators. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Calculate parameters of transmission lines for different circuit configurations. 
CO2: Analyze the performance of short, medium and long transmission lines. 
CO3: Analyze the effect of travelling waves on transmission lines. 
CO4: Estimate the effects of corona in transmission lines. 
CO5: Calculate sag and tension of transmission lines and design the line insulators. 
 
UNIT–I 
Transmission Line Parameters Calculations 
Conductor materials – Types of conductors – Composite Conductors - Calculation of 
resistance for solid conductors –   Calculation of inductance for Single-phase and Thre e-phase 
single and double circuit lines – Concept of GMR and GMD –Symmetrical and asymmetrical 
conductor configuration with and without transposition –Bundled conductors, Skin and 
Proximity effects. 
Calculation of capacitance for 2 wire and 3 wire system s – Effect of ground on capacitance – 
Capacitance calculations for symmetrical and asymmetri cal single and Three-phase single and 
double circuit lines without and with Bundled conductors. 
 
UNIT–II 
Performance Analysis of Transmission Lines 
Classification of Transmission Lines – Short, medium, long lines and their model 
representation –Nominal-T, Nominal-π and A, B, C, D Constants for symmetrical Networks. 
Rigorous Solution for long line equations –Representation of Long lines – Equivalent T and 
Equivalent π network models - Surge Impedance and Surge Impedance Loading of Long Lines 
- Regulation and efficiency for all types of lines – Ferranti effect. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT – III 
Power System Transients 
Types of System Transients – Propagation of Surges – Attenuation–Distortion– Reflection and 
Refraction Coefficients. 
 
Termination of lines with different types of conditions : Open Circuited Line –Short Circuited 
Line, Line terminated through a resistance and line connecte d to a cable. Reflection and 
Refraction at a T-Junction (Elementary approach only). 
 
UNIT–IV 
Corona& Effects of transmission lines 
Description of the phenomenon – Types of Corona - critical voltages and power loss – 
Numerical Problems - Advantages and Disadvantages of Coro na - Factors affecting corona - 
Radio Interference. 
 
UNIT–V 
Sag and Tension Calculations and Overhead Line Insulators: 
Sag and Tension calculations with equal and unequal heights of towers–Effect of Wind and Ice 
weight onconductor – Stringing chart and sag template and its applications. 
Types of Insulators – Voltage distribution in suspension insulators –Calculation of string 
efficiency and Methods forString efficiency improvement – Capacitance grading and Static 
Shielding. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Electrical Power Systems – by C.L.Wadhwa, New Age International (P) Limited, 
1998. 
2. Power System Engineering by I.J.Nagarath and D.P.Kothari, Tat a McGraw Hill, 3 rd 
Edition, 2019. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Power system Analysis –by John J Grainger William D Stevenson, TMC 
Companies, 4th edition 
2. Power System Analysis and Design by B.R.Gupta, Wheeler Publishing. 
3. A Text Book on Power System Engineering by M.L.Soni, P.V.Gupta,  
U.S.BhatnagarA.Chakrabarthy, DhanpatRai Co Pvt. Ltd.2016. 
4. Electrical Power Systems by P.S.R. Murthy, B.S. Publications, 2017. 
 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105104 
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/102/108102047 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Professional Core Elective- I L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Signals and Systems 
 
Course Objectives: 
 This gives the basics of signals and systems required for  all electrical engineering related 
courses. 
 To understand the behavior of signal in time and frequency domain. 
 To understand the characteristics of Linear Time Invariant (LTI) systems. 
 Concepts of the correlation and sampling process. 
 This give concepts of signals and Systems along with its analysis using different transform 
techniques. 
 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Apply the knowledge of various signals and operations. 
CO2: Analyze the spectral characteristics of periodic signals using Fourier Analysis. 
CO3: Classify the systems based on their properties and determine the response of  
LSI system usingconvolution. 
CO4: Understand the process of sampling and the effects of under sampling. 
CO5: Apply Laplace and z-transforms to analyze signals and Systems (continuous & 
discrete). 
 
UNIT – I 
Introduction 
 
Definition of Signals and Systems - Classification of  Signals - Classification of Systems - 
Operations onsignals: time-shifting - time-scaling - amplitude -shifting - amplitude-scaling. 
Problems on classification and characteristics of Sign als and Systems. Complex exponential 
and sinusoidal signals – Singularityfunctions and related functions: impulse func tion - step 
function signum function and ramp function.Analogy betwee n vectors and signals - orthogonal 
signal space - Signal approximation using orthogonalfunctions -  Mean square error - closed or 
complete set of orthogonal functions - Orthogonally incomplex functions. Related Problems. 
 
UNIT – II 
Fourier Series and Fourier Transform 
Introduction to Fourier series and Fourier Transform, repr esentation of continuous time 
periodic signals - properties of Fourier series - Dirichlet9s conditions - Trigonometric Fourier 
series and Exponential Fourier series - Relation betwee n Trigonometric and Exponential 
Fourier series - Complex Fourier spectrum. Deriving Fourier  transform from Fourier series - 
Fourier transform of arbitrary signal - Fourier transfor m of standard signals - Fourier transform 
of periodic signals - properties of Fourier transforms -  Fourier transforms involving impulse 
function and Signum function. Introduction to Hilbert Transform. Related Problems.  
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT – III 
Analysis of Linear Systems 
Introduction - Linear system - impulse response - Respons e of a linear system - Linear 
timeinvariant (LTI) system - Linear time variant (LTV)  system - Concept of convolution in time 
domain andfrequency domain - Graphical representation of convolution - Transfer function of a LTI 
system -Related problems. Filter characteristics of li near systems. Distortion less transmission 
through asystem -Signal bandwidth - system bandwidth - Ideal LPF - HPF and BPF characteristics 
– Causalityand PolyWiener criterion for physical realizat ion - relationship between bandwidth and 
rise time. 
 
UNIT – IV 
Correlation 
Auto-correlation and cross-correlation of functions - properties of correlation function - Energy 
density spectrum - Parseval9s theorem - Power density spectrum - Relation between Convolution 
and correlation - Detection of periodic signals in the presence of noise by correlation - Extraction of 
signal from noise by filtering. 
Sampling Theorem  
Graphical and analytical proof for Band Limited Signals - im pulse sampling - Natural and Flat top 
Sampling - Reconstruction of signal from its samples - effect of under sampling – Aliasing - 
Introduction to Band Pass sampling - Related problems. 
 
UNIT - V 
Laplace Transforms 
Introduction - Concept of region of convergence (ROC) for Laplace transforms - constraints on 
ROC forvarious classes of signals - Properties of L.T9s - Inverse Laplace transform - Relation 
between L.T9s -and F.T. of a signal. Laplace transform of certain signals using waveform synthesis. 
Z–Transforms 
Concept of Z- Transform of a discrete sequence. Region of convergence in Z-Transform - 
constraints onROC for various classes of signals - Inv erse Z-transform - properties of Z-transforms. 
Distinction 
between Laplace - Fourier and Z transforms. 
 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Signals - Systems & Communications - B.P. Lathi - BS Publications - 2003. 
2. Signals and Systems - A.V. Oppenheim - A.S. Willsky and S.H. Nawab - PHI - 2nd Edition1997 
3. Signals & Systems - Simon Haykin and Van Veen - Wiley - 2nd Edition - 2007 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Principles of Linear Systems and Signals – BP Lathi - Oxford University Press - 2015 
2. Signals and Systems – T K Rawat - Oxford University press - 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Professional Elective- I L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Computer Architecture and Organization 
 
Pre-requisite: 
Basic knowledge in digital electronics, fundamentals of computers. 
  
Course Objectives: 
 To explain the basic working of a digital computer. 
 To understand the register transfer language and micro operators. 
 To learn various addressing modes supported by the processors. 
 To be familiar with peripheral interfacing with processors. 
 To understand memory hierarchy in computers. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of this course, student will be able to: 
CO1: Demonstrate the instruction cycle of a computer. 
CO2: Understand various micro operations and register transfer language. 
CO3: Describe parallel processing and pipelining. 
CO4: Interface different peripherals with processors. 
CO5: Know the advantages of cache and virtual memory. 
 
UNIT-I 
Basic Computer Organization and Design: Instruction Codes, Co mputer Registers, Computer 
Instructions, Timing and Control, Instruction Cycle, Memory -Reference Instructions, Input- Output 
and Interrupt, Complete Computer Description, Design of Ba sic Computer, Design of Accumulator 
Logic. 
 
UNIT-II 
Register Transfer and Micro operations: Register Trans fer Language, Register Transfer, Bus and 
Memory Transfers, Arithmetic Micro operations, Logic Micro operations, Shift Micro operations, 
Arithmetic Logic Shift Unit. Micro programmed Control: Cont rol Memory, Address Sequencing, 
Micro program Example, Design of Control Unit. 
 
UNIT-III 
Central Processing Unit: Introduction, General Register Orga nization, Stack Organization, 
Instruction Formats, Addressing Modes, Data Transfer and Ma nipulation, Program Control, 
Reduced Instruction Set Computer (RISC) Pipeline and Vector Proc essing: Parallel Processing, 
Pipelining, Arithmetic Pipeline, Instruction Pipeline, RISK P ipeline, Vector Processing, Array 
Processors. 
 
UNIT-IV 
Input/output Organization: Peripheral Devices, I/O interface,  Asynchronous data transfer, Modes of 
transfer, priority Interrupt, Direct memory access, Input -Output Processor (IOP), Serial 
Communication. 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
UNIT-V 
Memory Organization: Memory Hierarchy, Main memory, Auxilia ry memory, Associate Memory, 
Cache Memory, and Virtual memory, Memory Management Hardware. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Computer System Architecture, M. Morris Mano, Prentice Hall of India Pvt. Ltd., 3 rd 
Edition, Sept. 2008. 
 
References Books: 
1. Computer Architecture and Organization, William Stallings, PHI P vt. Ltd., Eastern 
Economy Edition, Sixth Edition, 2003. 
2. Computer Organization and Architecture, Linda Null, Julia Lob ur, Narosa Publications 
ISBN 81- 7319-609-5 
3. Computer System Organization by John. P. Hayes. 
 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Professional Elective- I L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Communication systems 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To provide a comprehensive understanding of the principles of analog and digital 
communication systems. 
 To analyze the performance of modulation and demodulation techniques. 
 To understand the impact of noise on communication systems and study signal-to-noise ratio 
(SNR). 
 To explore the fundamentals of information theory and source/channel coding. 
 To examine various multiplexing and multiple access techniques used in modern 
communication systems. 
Course Outcomes:  
After successful completion of this course, students will be able to: 
 Explain the fundamental concepts of communication systems and modulation techniques. 
 Analyze and compare analog and digital modulation schemes based on performance metrics. 
 Understand and apply noise analysis to communication systems. 
 Interpret key concepts of information theory, source and channel coding. 
 Demonstrate understanding of multiplexing and multiple access schemes in modern 
communication networks. 
  
Unit I:  
Introduction to Communication Systems 
Elements of communication systems, Types of communicat ion: Analog and digital, Electromagnetic 
spectrum, signal types (deterministic, random, periodic, a periodic),Time domain and frequency domain 
analysis, Amplitude Modulation (AM): Generation, demodulation, spectrum, power relations 
 
Unit II:  
Angle Modulation 
Frequency Modulation (FM) and Phase Modulation (PM): Prin ciples and mathematical representation, 
Generation and demodulation of FM signals, Bandwidth of F M signals (Carson9s Rule), Comparison 
between AM and FM, Noise in AM and FM systems 
 
Unit III:  
Pulse and Digital Modulation 
Sampling theorem, aliasing, Pulse Amplitude Modulation (PAM), Pulse Width Modulation (PWM), Pulse 
Position Modulation (PPM), Pulse Code Modulation (PCM) and Delta Modulation (DM), Digital 
modulation schemes: ASK, FSK, PSK, QPSK, Comparison of digital modulation techniques 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Unit IV:  
Noise and Information Theory 
Noise: Internal and external noise, signal-to-noise ra tio (SNR), noise figure, Information theory basics: 
Entropy, mutual information, Source coding: Huffman coding, Channel capacity and Shanno n9s theorem, 
Error control coding: Parity checks, CRC, Hamming codes 
Unit V:  
Multiplexing and Multiple Access 
Time Division Multiplexing (TDM), Frequency Division Multi plexing (FDM), Code Division Multiple 
Access (CDMA), Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM), Spread spectrum techniques, 
Communication system examples: Radio, television, cellular systems, satellite communications 
Textbooks: 
1. Simon Haykin, Communication Systems, Wiley. 
2. B.P. Lathi, Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems, Oxford University Press. 
Reference Books: 
1. Taub and Schilling, Principles of Communication Systems, McGraw-Hill. 
2. John G. Proakis and Masoud Salehi, Fundamentals of Communication Systems, Pearson. 
3. Roddy and Coolen, Electronic Communications, Pearson Education. 
4. Kennedy and Davis, Electronic Communication Systems, McGraw-Hill. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Open Elective-I 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Renewable Energy Sources 
Pre-requisite:Basic Electrical Engineering 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To study the solar radiation data, equivalent circuit of PV cell and its I-V & P-V 
characteristics. 
 To understand the concept of Wind Energy Conversion & its applications. 
 To study the principles of biomass, hydel and geothermal energy. 
 To understand the principles of ocean Thermal Energy Conve rsion, waves and power 
associated with it. 
 To study the various chemical energy sources such as fue l cell and hydrogen energy 
along with their operation and equivalent circuit. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Analyze solar radiation data, extra-terrestrial radiation, radiation on earth9s  
Surface and solar Energy Storage. 
CO2: Illustrate the components of wind energy systems. 
CO3: Illustrate the working of biomass, hydel plants and Geothermal plants. 
CO4: Demonstrate the principle of Energy production from OTEC, Tidal and Waves. 
CO5: Evaluate the concept   and working of Fuel cells & MHD power generation. 
 
 
UNIT–I 
Solar Energy 
Introduction - Renewable Sources - prospects, solar radiation at the Earth Surface - Equivalent 
circuit of a Photovoltaic (PV) Cell - I-V & P-V Charact eristics - Solar Energy Collectors: Flat 
plate Collectors, concentrating collectors - Solar Ene rgy storage systems and Applications: 
Solar Pond - Solar water heating - Solar Green house. 
 
UNIT–II 
Wind Energy 
Introduction - basic Principles of Wind Energy Conversion , the nature of Wind - the power in 
the wind - Wind Energy Conversion - Site selection consi derations - basic components of 
Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) - Classification - Applications. 
 
UNIT–III 
Biomass, Hydel and Geothermal Energy  
Biomass: Introduction - Biomass conversion technologies- Photosy nthesis. Factors affecting 
Bio digestion.  
Hydro plants:
 Basic working principle – Classification of hydro systems: Large, small, micro 
hydel plants. 
Geothermal Energy: Introduction, Geothermal Sources – Applications - operational and 
Environmental problems. 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT–IV 
Energy From oceans, Waves & Tides:  
Oceans: Introduction - Ocean Thermal Electric Conversion (OTEC ) – methods - prospects of 
OTEC in India.  
Waves: Introduction - Energy and Power from the waves - Wave Energy conversion devices.  
Tides: Basic principle of Tide Energy -Components of Tidal Energy. 
 
UNIT–V 
Chemical Energy Sources: 
Fuel Cells: Introduction - Fuel Cell Equivalent Circuit - operation o f Fuel cell - types of Fuel 
Cells - Applications. 
Hydrogen Energy:  Introduction - Methods of Hydrogen production - Storage and 
Applications 
Magneto Hydro Dynamic (MHD) Power generation: Principle of Operation - Types. 
 
Text Books: 
1. G.D.Rai, Non-Conventional Energy Sources, Khanna Publications, 2011.  
2. John Twidell& Tony Weir, Renewable Energy Sources, Taylor & Francis, 2013. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. S.P.Sukhatme & J.K.Nayak, Solar Energy-Principles of The rmal Collection and 
Storage, TMH, 2011. 
2. John Andrews & Nick Jelly, Energy Science- principles, Te chnologies and Impacts, 
Oxford, 2nd edition, 2013. 
3. ShobaNath Singh, Non- Conventional Energy Resources, Pearson Publications, 2015. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103206 
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/103/107/103107157 
 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Open Elective-I 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Electrical Machine Design 
 
Pre-requisite: 
Basics of Conservation of Electrical Energy 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To introduce the fundamental principles of electrical machine design  
 To analyze and apply thermal and mechanical considerations. 
 To understand the selection and role of magnetic, electric, and insulating materials  
 To explore the application of Computer Aided Design (CAD)  
 To develop analytical skills to formulate and solve design-oriented problems 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Analyze the design factors and modern trends in electrical machine design. 
CO2: Design different types of electrical machines based on performance requirements. 
CO3: Evaluate materials and cooling methods for optimized machine performance. 
CO4: Apply analytical and CAD tools for efficient machine design. 
CO5: Solve design-oriented numerical problems and optimize parameters under constraints 
UNIT–I 
Fundamental Aspects of Electrical Machine Design   
Design of machines - design factors - limitation in design - modern trends inelectrical machine 
design – types of magnetic, electric and insulatingmaterials – modes of heat dissipation – cooling of 
rotating machines – methods of cooling.  
 
UNIT–II: 
Design of transformers   
Transformer windings – output equation – design of main dimensions – design of core - choice of 
flux density – determination of number of turns and length of mean term  - resistance and leakage 
reactance – no load current calculation –cooling of transformers- calculation of number of tubes. 
 
UNIT–III: 
Design of DC Machines  
Output equation –selection of specific magnetic and electric loadings - separation of D and L – 
estimation of number of conductors, armature slots and conduct dimensions – choice of number of 
poles and calculation of length of airgap – design of field systems, interpoles and brushes. 
 
UNIT–IV 
Design of Induction motors  
Output equation -main dimensions – choice of average flux density and ampere conduction for 
meter –– design of stator slots and rotor slots- design of rotor bars end rings– design of wound rotor 
– design of no-load current. 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
UNIT–V 
Design of Synchronous Machines  
Types of construction – output equation - main dimensions – short circuit ratio and its effects on the 
performance – design of rotor –Design of field winding – Design of turbo alternators – Rotor design 
temperature rise and its effects. 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. A.K.Sawhney , <A Course in Electrical Machines Design= , Dhan path Rai & Co. 6th edition 2010. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. AE Clayton and NN Hancock, <The Performance and Design of Direct Current Machines=, 
CBS Publishers, 3rd edition, 2004.  
2. M.G. Say, <Performance and Design of A.C. Machines=, ELBS and Pitman & Sons, 4th  
edition, 2013.   
3. S. K. Sen, <Principles of Electrical Machine Design with computer programmes=, Oxford 
and IBH Company Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi, 2nd edition,2006.  
4. K. M. Vishnu Murthy, <Computer Aided Design of Electrical Machines=, B.S. Publications, 
1st edition 2008.  
 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://cusp.umn.edu/electric-machine-design-videos  
2. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108102146 
3. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Open Elective-I 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Intelligent Control Systems 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To introduce the fundamentals of intelligent control sys tems and their applications in 
modern engineering. 
 To develop the ability to design intelligent controllers fo r complex, nonlinear, and uncertain 
systems. 
 To explore various intelligent control techniques, including fuzzy logic, neural networks, 
genetic algorithms, and hybrid systems. 
 To implement intelligent control systems using real-world applications in robotics, 
automation, and process control. 
 To study the hybridization of different intelligent techni ques to improve the performance of 
control systems. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to 
 Explain the fundamental principles of intelligent control systems and their components. 
 Develop artificial neural networks (ANNs) and apply them for control system applications. 
 Design and implement fuzzy logic controllers for nonlinear systems. 
 Apply genetic algorithms (GA) for optimization and control ler tuning in intelligent control 
systems. 
 Analyze and solve complex control problems using hybrid intelligent techniques  
 
UNIT-I 
Introduction to Intelligent Control Systems 
Overview of traditional control systems vs. intelligent co ntrol systems. Intelligent control 
paradigms: Fuzzy Logic, Neural Networks, Genetic Algorithms, Exper t Systems. Components and 
structure of intelligent control systems. Advantages a nd limitations of intelligent 
control.Applications of intelligent control systems in various industries. 
 
UNIT-II 
Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) 
Biological foundations of neural networks.Neurons, activation functions, and architecture of ANNs. 
Supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms.Perceptrons and mul ti-layer perceptrons 
(MLP).Backpropagation algorithm and gradient descent.Applica tions of neural networks in control 
systemdesign.Training neural networks for control applications. 
 
UNIT-III 
Fuzzy Logic Systems 
Introduction to fuzzy sets and membership functions, Linguis tic variables and fuzzy rules. Fuzzy 
inference systems: Mamdani and Sugeno methods. Defuzzificati on techniques: centroid, mean of 
maximum, etc. Fuzzy controllers design for nonlinear system s. Applications of fuzzy logic in 
control systems. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT-IV 
Genetic Algorithms (GAs) 
Fundamentals of genetic algorithms: selection, crossover, mutation, and fitness 
function.Representation of solutions in GAs (chromosome s).GA-based optimization for control 
system design.Hybrid GA-based optimization and neural net works. Applications of GAs in 
optimizing controllers for complex systems.Tuning control parameters using genetic algorithms 
with an example. 
 
UNIT-V 
Hybrid Intelligent Systems and Applications 
Overview of hybrid systems: combining fuzzy logic, neural networ ks, and genetic 
algorithms.Neuro-fuzzy systems and their design.Adaptive control using hybrid intelligent systems. 
Case studies: Intelligent control in robotics, process co ntrol, and automation.Real-time applications 
and challenges in intelligent control systems.Simulation tools for implementing intelligent control 
systems (MATLAB, Simulink, etc.). 
 
Textbooks: 
1. "Fuzzy Control Systems" by Driankov, Hellen Doorn, and Rein frank. 
2. "Neural Networks for Control" by W. Thomas Miller II and Richard S. Sutton 
3. "Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Lea rning" by David E. 
Goldberg 
4. "Fuzzy Logic with Engineering Applications" by Timothy J. R oss 
 
Reference Books: 
1. "Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach" by Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. 
2. "Intelligent Control Systems with LabVIEW" by D. R. Kiran and R. K. Gupta. 
3. "Soft Computing and Intelligent Systems Design" by P. S. Karray and D. de Silva. 
4. "Handbook of Intelligent Control: Neural, Fuzzy, and Adaptive Approaches" by Dan W. 
Patton, Jorge D. Suykens, and Tim Miller. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Professional Core Lab - 1 L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
Power Electronics Lab 
 
Course objectives:  
 To learn the characteristics of various power electroni c devices and analyze firing 
circuits and commutation circuits of SCR. 
 To analyze the performance of single –phase and three –phase full –wave bridge 
converters with both resistive and inductive loads. 
 To understand the operation of AC voltage regulator with resistive and inductive loads. 
 To understand the working of Buck converter and Boost converter. 
 To understand the working of single-phase & three-phase inverters. 
 
Course outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Analyse characteristics of various power electronic devices and design firing circuits  
for SCR. 
CO2: Analyse the performance of single–phase dual, three–phase full–wave bridge  
     converters and dual converter with both resistive and inductive loads. 
CO3: Examine the operation of Single-phase AC voltage regulator and Cycloconverter 
with resistive and inductive loads. 
CO4: Differentiate the working and control of Buck converter and Boost converter. 
CO5: Differentiate the working & control of Square wave inverter and PWM inverter. 
 
Any 10 of the Following Experiments are to be conducted 
 
1. Characteristics of SCR - Power MOSFET & Power IGBT. 
2. R, RC & UJT firing circuits for SCR. 
3. Single -Phase semi-converter with R & RL loads. 
4. Single -Phase full-converter with R & RL loads.  
5. Three- Phase full-converter with R & RL loads. 
6. Single-phase dual converter in circulating current & non ci rculating current mode of 
operation for R & RL Loads.  
7. Single-Phase AC Voltage Regulator with R & RL Loads. 
8. Single-phase step down Cycloconverter with R & RL Loads. 
9. Boost converter in Continuous Conduction Mode operation. 
10. Buck converter in Continuous Conduction Mode operation. 
11. Single -Phase half bridge inverter with R & RL Loads. 
12. Single -Phase full bridge inverter with R & RL Loads. 
13. Single - Phase Half Bridge PWM inverter. 
14. Single - Phase Full Bridge PWM inverter. 
15. Three-phase bridge inverter with 1200and / or 1800 conduction mode. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Professional Core Lab - 2 L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
Analog and Digital Circuits Lab 
 
Course Objectives: 
To impart knowledge on  
 Analysis of transistor amplifiers 
 Analysis of feedback amplifiers and oscillators  
 Realization of digital circuits such data routing, registers and counters. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, the studentwill be able to,   
CO1: Analyse diode clipper/clamper circuits and transistor biasing.  
CO2: Illustrate the operation of feedback amplifiers and oscillator circuits.  
CO3: Analyze the applications of linear IC9s 
CO4: Demonstrate the operation of digital circuits such as arithmetic, data routing, registers and  
counters. 
 
Any 5 of the Following Experiments are to be conducted from each PART. 
PART-A 
1. Analysis of clipper and clamper circuits. 
2. Analysis of self-bias to a transistor. 
3. Analysis of voltage series and current series feedback amplifiers. 
4. Analysis of Wien Bridge oscillator and RC-phase shift oscillator. 
5. Analysis of Integrator and Differentiator Circuits using IC 741. 
6. Analysis of Monostable and Astable multivibrator operationusing IC 555 Timer. 
7. Analysis of Schmitt Trigger Circuits using IC 741 and IC 555. 
8. Verify the PLL characteristics using IC 565. 
9. Analysis of 8 bit A to D and D to A circuits 
PART-B 
1. Design of Full adder and Full Subtractor using logic gates. 
2. Realization of parallel adder/subtractor using IC 7483. 
3. Implementation of 3 to 8line decoder using logic gates and IC 7445. 
4. Implementation of 8 to 1 multiplexer using logic gates and IC 74151. 
5. Verify the operation of master-slave JK flip-flop using IC7476. 
6. Realization of the following shift registers using IC7495. 
a) SISO 
b) SIPO  
c) PISO  
d)PIPO   
7. Implementation ofMod-10 ripple counter using flip-flops and IC 7490. 
8. Implementation of Mod-8 synchronous up/down counters using flip-flops. 
9. Implementation of 4 bit Ring Counter and Johnson Counter using D flip-flops/J-K flip-flops. 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Skill Enhancement course L T P C 
0 1 2 2 
Soft skills 
 
Course Objectives 
 To help students understand and develop key personal and interpersonal skills required in 
professional environments. 
 To improve communication skills, emotional intelligence, and public speaking ability. 
 To instill confidence, teamwork, and leadership skills for effective workplace behavior. 
 To enhance time management, adaptability, and problem-solving capabilities. 
 To prepare students for interviews, group discussions, and career advancement. 
Course Outcomes 
Upon successful completion of the course, students will be able to: 
 Communicate effectively in verbal and written formats in professional settings. 
 Demonstrate improved interpersonal skills and emotional intelligence. 
 Work collaboratively in teams and lead group activities or discussions. 
 Manage time efficiently and adapt to changing work environments. 
 Present themselves professionally during interviews, presentations, and group discussions. 
Unit I:  
Communication Skills 
Verbal and non-verbal communication, Listening skills and f eedback techniques, Barriers to 
communication and how to overcome them, Email and business writing etiquette, Public speaking and 
group communication 
Unit II:  
Interpersonal & Team Skills 
Building interpersonal relationships, Conflict resolution an d negotiation, Leadership styles and team 
dynamics, Group behavior and decision-making, Working in diverse environments 
Unit III: 
Emotional Intelligence & Stress Management 
Understanding emotional intelligence (EQ), Self-awareness, e mpathy, and social skills , Stress and 
anxiety: causes and coping strategies, Work-life balance an d mental well-being, Assertiveness and self-
confidence, 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
 
Unit IV:  
Professional Etiquette & Ethics 
Grooming and professional image, Business and social etiquette , Time management and goal setting, 
Ethics and values in the workplace, Respect for diversity and inclusion 
Unit V:  
Interview Skills & Career Planning 
Resume writing and cover letter drafting, Job search st rategies and career planning, Interview techniques 
(HR and technical rounds), Group discussions and mock interviews, Feedback and improvement 
strategies 
Textbooks 
1. Barun K. Mitra, Personality Development and Soft Skills, Oxford University Press. 
2. Meenakshi Raman & Sangeeta Sharma, Technical Communication: Principles and Practice, 
Oxford University Press. 
3. Goleman, Daniel, Emotional Intelligence, Bantam Books. 
Reference Books 
1. Alex K., Soft Skills: Know Yourself & Know the World, S. Chand Publishing. 
2. P. Subba Rao, Management and Organizational Behavior, Himalaya Publishing. 
3. Pease, Allan & Barbara, The Definitive Book of Body Language, Bantam. 
4. Carnegie, Dale, How to Win Friends and Influence People, Simon & Schuster. 
5. Online platforms like NPTEL, Coursera, and LinkedIn Learning for video-based learning and 
activities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Engineering Science L T P C 
0 0 2 1 
Tinkering Lab 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To develop a mindset for innovation, creativity, and problem-solving through hands-on activities. 
 To introduce students to basic tools, components, and systems used in prototyping (electronics, 
mechanical, software). 
 To encourage interdisciplinary thinking and collaborative project development. 
 To provide exposure to modern tools such as Arduino, Raspberry Pi, sensors, 3D printing, and 
simple mechanical assemblies. 
 To build confidence in experimenting with ideas and transforming them into working prototypes. 
Course Outcomes 
At the end of the course, students will be able to: 
 Identify and use basic electronic components and prototyping tools. 
 Design and implement simple circuits and embedded systems using microcontrollers. 
 Use sensors and actuators to create interactive systems. 
 Apply mechanical fabrication techniques using 3D printers and simple mechanical tools. 
 Collaborate effectively to build innovative, interdisciplinary prototypes or mini-projects. 
 Present and communicate their design ideas and implementation clearly. 
List of Experiments 
1. Familiarization with lab tools – Breadboard, multimeter, soldering station, power supply. 
2. Basic electronic circuits – Series, parallel circuits, use of resistors, capacitors, LEDs. 
3. Introduction to Arduino – Writing and uploading simple sketches. 
4. Sensor interfacing – Temperature, light, motion, ultrasonic sensors. 
5. Actuator control – Servo motor, DC motor, relay modules. 
6. Serial communication – Between Arduino and PC. 
7. Simple IOT application – Sending data to cloud (e.g., using ThingSpeak or Blynk). 
8. Mobile App Integration – Basic app to control devices using Bluetooth. 
9. Mechanical prototyping – Introduction to 3D printing and simple CAD modeling. 
Textbooks 
1. "Getting Started with Arduino" – Massimo Banzi and Michael Shiloh. 
2. "Make: Electronics – Learning Through Discovery" – Charles Platt. 
3. "Exploring Arduino" – Jeremy Blum. 
Reference Books: 
1. "Practical Electronics for Inventors" – Paul Scherz and Simon Monk. 
2. "Arduino Cookbook" – Michael Margolis and Brian Jepson. 
3. "Make: Sensors" – Tero Karvinen, Kimmo Karvinen, and Ville Valtokari. 
4. "Python Programming for Raspberry Pi" – Tim Cox (if Raspberry Pi is included). 
E resources: Arduino (
www.arduino.cc), Raspberry Pi (www.raspberrypi.org), Instructables 
(www.instructables.com), and Tinkercad. 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Evaluation of CommunityService Internship L T P C 
0 0 0 2 
 
The students which are done during II B. Tech II Sem Summer Vacation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – I SEMESTER Mandatory Course L T P C 
2 0 0 0 
Technical Paper Writing & IPR 
Course Objectives 
 To develop an understanding of the structure, style, and ethics of technical and scientific writing. 
 To train students in effective academic communication, including research paper, thesis, and 
project report writing. 
 To create awareness about various forms of intellectual property and the process of securing IP 
rights. 
 To provide foundational knowledge on patents, copyrights, trademarks, and design rights. 
 To sensitize students about innovation, commercialization, and legal aspects of research. 
Course Outcomes 
Upon successful completion of the course, students will be able to: 
 Write effective technical papers and reports that conform to academic and professional standards. 
 Present technical information clearly and ethically in various formats (papers, posters, 
presentations). 
 Understand the process of peer review and publishing in journals/conferences. 
 Identify and explain different types of intellectual property and how they are protected. 
Apply knowledge of IPR to protect and commercialize their innovations responsibly 
Unit I:  
      Fundamentals of Technical Writing 
Basics of technical communication, Types of technical doc uments: research papers, project reports, 
thesis, Structure and components of a technical paper (Abstra ct, Introduction, Methods, Results, 
Discussion), Clarity, precision, and language usage in sci entific writing, Ethics in writing: plagiarism, 
data falsification, multiple submissions 
 
Unit II:  
Writing for Publication 
Selection of journal/conference, understanding journal impact factor, indexing, and scope, Manuscript 
preparation and formatting guidelines, Submission process and pee r review system, Responding to 
reviewers and revisions 
 
Unit III:  
Presentation and Dissemination 
Preparing abstracts, posters, and oral presentations,Tools for formatting and referencing (LaTeX, MS 
Word, EndNote, Mendeley, Zotero), Best practices for graphical and tabular data representation, 
Collaboration and authorship ethics, Copyright and open-access publishing 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Unit IV:  
Introduction to IPR 
Definition and need for Intellectual Property, Categories : Patents, Copyrights, Trademarks, Trade 
Secrets, Industrial Designs, Basic principles of patenta bility: novelty, non-obviousness, utility, 
National and international IPR organizations (WIPO, IPO, USPTO, EPO),  IPR protection 
mechanisms in India 
 
Unit V:  
Patent Filing and Innovation Management 
Patent filing process in India and abroad, Patent search using free databases (Google Patents, Espace 
net, WIPO), Patent drafting basics: claims, specifications , drawings, Technology transfer and 
commercialization of IP, Role of incubation centers and start-up policy 
      Textbooks 
1. M. Ashok Kumar & R. Murugesan, Research Methodology and IPR, Charulatha Publications. 
2. R. N. Khandare, Research Methodology & IPR, S. Chand Publishing. 
3. Michael Alley, The Craft of Scientific Writing, Springer. 
Reference Books 
1. B.L. Wadehra, Law Relating to Intellectual Property, Universal Law Publishing Co. 
2. Deborah E. Bouchoux, Intellectual Property: The Law of Trademarks, Copyrights, Patents and 
Trade Secrets, Cengage Learning. 
3. Day & Gastel, How to Write and Publish a Scientific Paper, Cambridge University Press. 
4. Robin Jeffery & Michael Wilkinson, Publishing Research Successfully, SAGE. 
5. Government of India: IPR Policy Documents and Patent Office Guidelines (available on 
https://ipindia.gov.in) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B.Tech. III Year-II Semester 
 
S.No Category Course 
Code Title L T P C 
1 PC  
Electrical Measurements and 
Instrumentation 
3 0 0 3 
2 PC  Microprocessors and Microcontrollers 3 0 0 3 
3 PC  Power System Analysis 3 0 0 3 
4 PCE - II  
1. Switchgear and Protection  
2. Advanced Control Systems 
3. Renewable and Distributed Energy 
Technologies 
3 0 0 3 
5 PCE - III  
1. Electric Drives 
2. Digital Signal Processing 
3.  High Voltage Engineering 
3 0 0 3 
6 OE - II  
1. Fundamentals of Electric Vehicles 
2. Electrical Wiring Estimation and 
Costing 
3. Utilization of Electrical Energy 
3 0 0 3 
7 PC Lab-1  
Electrical Measurements and 
Instrumentation Lab 
0 0 3 1.5 
8 PC Lab-2  
Microprocessors and Microcontrollers 
Lab 
0 0 3 1.5 
9 SEC  
IoT Applications of Electrical 
Engineering Lab 
0 1 2 2 
10 AC  Research Methodology 2 0 0 0 
Total 20 1 8 23 
Mandatory Industry Internship of 08 weeks duration during summer vacation 
 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Professional Core L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Electrical Measurements and Instrumentation 
 
Pre-requisite:  
Basics of Electrical and Electronics Engineering. 
Course Objectives: 
 To understand and analyze the factors that effect the various measuring units. 
 To choose the appropriate meters for measuring of voltage, current, power, power factor 
and energy qualities and understand the concept of standardization. 
 Describe the operating principle of AC & DC bridges for mea surement of resistance, 
inductance and capacitance. 
 To understand the concept of the transducer and their effecti veness in converting from 
one form to the other form for the ease of calculating and measuring purposes. 
 To understand the operating principles of basic building block s of digital systems, 
record and display units. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Know the construction and working of various types of analog instruments. 
CO2: Describe the construction and working of wattmeter and power factor meters 
CO3: Know the construction and working various bridges for the measurement resistance 
inductance and capacitance 
CO4: Know the operational concepts of various transducers 
CO5: Know the construction and operation digital meters 
 
UNIT - I 
Analog Ammeter and Voltmeters 
Classification – deflecting, control and damping torques – PMMC, moving iron type and 
electrostatic instruments – Construction – Torque equation – Range extension – Errors and 
compensations – advantages and disadvantages. Instrument transformers: Current Transformer 
and Potential Transformer – theory –Ratio and phase angle errors–Numerical Problems. 
 
UNIT - II 
Analog Wattmeters and Power Factor Meters 
Electrodynamometer type wattmeter (LPF and UPF) – Power factor meters: Dynamometer and 
M.I type (Single phase and Three phase) – Construction – torque equation – advantages and 
disadvantages.Potentiometers: Principle and operation of D.C Crompton9s potentiometer – 
Standardization –Applications –AC Potentiometer (Polar and coordinate types) –
Standardization – Applications – Numerical Problems.  
 
UNIT - III 
Measurements of Electrical parameters 
DC Bridges: Method of measuring low, medium and high resistance –Wheat stone9s bridgefor 
measuring medium resistance– Kelvin9s double bridge for measuring low resistance –  Loss of 
charge method for measurement of high resistance – Megger – measurement of earth 
resistance – Numerical Problems. 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
AC Bridges: Measurement of inductance and quality factor – Maxwell9s bridge –  Hay9s 
bridge – Anderson9s bridge. Measurement of capacitance and loss angle – Desauty9s bridge – 
Schering Bridge – Wien9s bridge –Numerical Problems. 
 
UNIT - IV 
Transducers 
Definition – Classification– Resistive, Inductive and Capacitive Transducer – LVDT – Strain 
Gauge – Thermistors – Thermocouples – Piezo electric and Photo Diode Transducers – Hall 
effect sensors – Numerical Problems. 
 
UNIT - V 
Digital meters 
Digital Voltmeters – Successive approximation DVM – Ramp type DVM and Integrating type 
DVM – Digital frequency meter – Digital multimeter – Digital tachometer – Digital Energy 
Meter – Q meter. CRO – measurement of phase difference and Frequency using lissaji ous 
patterns – Numerical Problems. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Electrical Measurements and measuring Instruments by E.W. G olding and  F.C.Widdis - 
5th Edition - Wheeler Publishing. 
2. Modern Electronic Instrumentation and Measurement Technique s by A.D. Helfrick and 
W.D. Cooper - PHI - 5th Edition - 2002. 
  
Reference Books: 
1. Electrical & Electronic Measurement & Instruments by A.K.SawhneyDhanpat Rai & Co. 
Publications -  19th revised edition -  2011. 
2. Electrical and Electronic Measurements and instrumentati on by R.K.Rajput -  S.Chand -  
3rd edition. 
3. Electrical Measurements by Buckingham and Price -  Prentice – Hall 
4. Electrical Measurements by Forest K. Harris. John Wiley and Sons 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105153 
 
 
 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Professional Core L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Microprocessors and Microcontrollers 
 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To impart knowledge of the architecture and functioning of 8086 micr oprocessor and 8051 
microcontrollers. 
 To familiarize students with assembly language programming conc epts and their practical 
implementation. 
 To understand memory interfacing and peripheral device interfacing with 8086 and 8051. 
 To develop the ability to interface microcontrollers with external hardware components and 
sensors. 
 To provide hands-on experience for designing embedded systems using 8051. 
 
Course Outcomes 
After completion of the course, the student will be able to 
 
 Understand the internal architecture and operations of 8086 mi croprocessor and write assembly 
language programs. 
 Analyze and design memory and peripheral interfacing technique s for microprocessors and 
microcontrollers. 
 Develop embedded applications using 8051 microcontroller and its instruction set. 
 Interface 8051 with external peripherals such as LCDs, motor s, keypads, ADCs/DACs, and 
sensors. 
 Design simple embedded systems integrating sensors and actuator s using the 8051 
microcontrollers. 
 
Unit I 
8086 Microprocessors and Assembly Language Programming 
Introduction to microcomputer, evolution of processors and semiconductor memories (RAM, ROM, 
EPROM, EEPROM), Architecture of 8086 microprocessor, register  organization of 8086, Pipelining 
concept, Memory segmentation, Addressing Modes. 
Instruction Set and Programming: Instruction set of 8086 micro processors: Data transfer instructions, 
Arithmetic instructions, Logical Instructions, String inst ructions, Stack related instructions, Branching 
instructions, Assembler directives. Data transfer instructions of 8085 microprocessor. 
 
Unit II 
8086 Operational Modes and Memory Interfacing 
Minimum and Maximum mode operations of 8086 with timing diagrams, P rocedures and macros, Stack 
Structure of 8086, Static RAM Interfacing, Interfacing of 8255 Pr ogrammable Peripheral Interface with 
8086 microprocessors.Dynamic RAM, Direct memory access. 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Unit III 
8051 Microcontroller 
Comparison between microprocessor and microcontroller, 8051 fa mily microcontroller, RAM 
architecture of 8051, Integrated Development Environment (IDE),  Pin description of 8051 
microcontroller, Machine cycle. Addressing Modes, Instructio n set of 8051: Data transfer instructions, 
Arithmetic instructions, Logical Instructions, Stack re lated instructions, Branching instructions. 
Programing and Applications of Timers, Interrupts, Universal As ynchronous Receiver Transmitter 
(UART). External memory interfacing with 8051 microcontroller, various constituents of hex file 
 
Unit IV 
Interfacing 8051 with Peripherals 
Interfacing 8051 with: Matrix Keypad, LCD, Seven-segment displa ys, L293D Motor Driver, Stepper 
motor, Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC 0804) and Digital-to-Analog Converter (DAC 0808). 
 
Unit V:  
Sensor and Relay Interfacing with 8051 
Interfacing of temperature sensor LM35 with 8051, Relay int erfacing with 8051, Case studies and 
practical applications using 8051. 
 
TEXT BOOKS: 
 
i. Microprocessors and Interfacing – Programming and Hard ware by Douglas V Hall, SSSP Rao, 
Tata McGrawHill Education Private Limited, 3rd Edition.  
ii. The 8051 Microcontroller & Embedded Systems Using Assembly and C  by Kenneth J.Ayala, 
Dhananjay V.Gadre, Cengage Learninbg , India Edition.  
 
REFERENCES:  
 
i. The Intel Microprocessors-Architecture, Programming, and In terfacing by Barry B.Brey, Pearson, 
Eighth Edition-2012.  
ii. Microprocessors and Microcontrollers-Architecture, Progr amming and System Design by Krishna 
Kant, PHI Learning Private Limited, Second Edition, 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Professional Core L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Power System Analysis 
 
Pre-requisite:  
Concepts of electrical circuits and power systems-II. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To develop the impedance diagram (p.u) and formation of Ybus 
 To learn the different load flow methods. 
 To learn the Zbusbuilding algorithm. 
 To learn short circuit calculation for symmetrical faults 
 To learn the effect of   unsymmetrical faults and their effects. 
 To learn the stability of power systems and methods to improve stability. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Draw impedance diagram for a power system network and calculate per unit quantities. 
CO2: Apply the load flow solution to a power system using different methods. 
CO3: Form Zbus for a power system network and analyse the effect of symmetrical faults. 
CO4: Find the sequence components for power system Components and analyse its effects of 
unsymmetrical faults. 
CO5: Analyse the stability concepts of a power system. 
 
UNIT - I 
Circuit Topology 
Graph theory definitions – Formation of element node incidence and bus incidence ma trices – 
Primitive network representation – Formation of Y bus matrix by singular transformation and 
direct inspection methods. 
Per Unit Representation 
Per Unit Quantities–Single line diagram – Impedance diagram of a power system – Numerical 
Problems. 
 
UNIT - II 
Power Flow Studies 
Necessity of power flow studies – Derivation of static power flow equations – Power flow 
solution using Gauss-Seidel Method – Newton Raphson Method (Rectangular and polar 
coordinates form) – Decoupled and Fast Decoupled methods – Algorithmic approach – 
Numerical Problems on 3–bus system only. 
 
UNIT - III 
Z-Bus Algorithm 
Formation of Zbus: Algorithm for the Modification of Z bus Matrix (without mutual impedance) 
– Numerical Problems. 
Symmetrical Fault Analysis 
Reactance9s of Synchronous Machine –  Three Phase Short Circuit Currents - Short circuit 
MVA calculations for Power Systems – Numerical Problems. 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
UNIT - IV 
Symmetrical Components  
Definition of symmetrical components – symmetrical components of unbalanced three phase 
systems – Power in symmetrical components – Sequence impedances and Sequence networks 
of Synchronous generator,Transformers andTransmission line-Numerical Problems. 
Unsymmetrical Fault analysis  
Various types of faults: LG– LL– LLG and LLL on unloaded alternator-Numerical problems. 
 
UNIT - V 
Power System Stability Analysis 
Elementary concepts of Steady state – Dynamic and Transient Stabilities – Swing equation – 
Steady state stability – Equal area criterion of stability – Applications of Equal area criterion – 
Factors affecting transient stability – Methods to improve steady state and transient stability – 
Numerical problems. 
 
Text Books: 
1.Power System Analysis by Grainger and Stevenson - Tata McGraw Hill.2003 
      2. Modern Power system Analysis – by I.J.Nagrath& D .P.Kothari: Tata    
          McGraw–Hill Publishing Company - 3rd edition - 2007. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Power System Analysis – by A.R.Bergen -  Prentice Hall -  2nd edition -  2009. 
2. Power System Analysis by HadiSaadat – Tata McGraw–Hill 3rd edition -  2010. 
3. Power System Analysis by B.R.Gupta -  A H Wheeler Publishing C ompany Limited - 
1998. 
4. Power System Analysis and Design by J.Duncan Glover -  M.S. Sarma -   T.J.Overbye – 
Cengage Learning publications -  5th edition -  2011. 
 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/117/105/117105140 
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Professional Core Elective-II L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Switchgear and Protection 
Pre-requisite: 
 Basic concepts of Electrical Machines and Power Systems . 
Course Objectives: 
 To explain the working principles and applications of circu it breakers in power systems, 
including MCBs, oil, SF6, and vacuum breakers. 
 To provide an understanding of electromagnetic protection mechanisms, particularly relays used 
in fault detection and system protection (overcurrent, under-voltage, directional, differential). 
 To analyze protection techniques for generators and transfor mers, including fault protection 
schemes like percentage differential protection and Buchholz relays. 
 To explore feeder and busbar protection methods using advance d relay systems such as distance 
and static relays. 
 To study over-voltage protection systems including lightning arr esters and neutral grounding 
methods to safeguard the power system. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, student will be able to  
CO1: Understand and describe the operation of circuit breakers, including their ratings, principles 
of arc interruption, and types. 
CO2: Analyze relay-based protection systems, identifying and explaining their roles in 
overcurrent, undervoltage, and fault detection. 
CO3: Design protection schemes for generators and transformers, addressing faults like restricted 
earth faults and inter-turn faults. 
CO4: Implement feeder and busbar protection using advanced relays such as distance, 
impedance, and static relays. 
CO5: Evaluate over-voltage protection strategies, including the use of lightning arresters, and 
understand various neutral grounding techniques. 
 
UNIT – I 
Circuit Breakers 
Miniature Circuit Breaker(MCB) – Elementary principles of arc interruption – Restriking Voltage 
and Recovery voltages – Restriking phenomenon - RRRV – Average and Max. RRRV – Current 
chopping and Resistance switching – Concept of oil circuit breakers – Description and operation of 
Air Blast– Vacuum and SF6 circuit breakers– Circuit Breaker ratings and specifications– Concept of 
Auto reclosing. 
 
UNIT – II  
Electromagnetic Protection 
Relay connection – Balanced beam type attracted armature relay - induction disc and induction cup 
relays–Torque equation - Relays classification –Instantaneous– DMT and IDMT types – 
Applications of relays: Over current and under voltage relay s– Directional relays – Differential 
relays and percentage differential relays – Universal torque equation – Distance relays: Impedance – 
Reactance– Mho and offset mho relays– Characteristics of distance relays and comparison. 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
UNIT – III  
Generator Protection 
Protection of generators against stator faults– Rotor faults and abnormal conditions– restricted earth 
fault and inter turn fault protection– Numerical examples. 
Transformer Protection 
Percentage differential protection – Design of CT9s ratio–  Buchholz relay protection –Numerical 
examples. 
 
UNIT – IV  
Feeder and Bus bar Protection & Static Relays:  
Over current Protection schemes – PSM - TMS – Numerical examples – Carrier current and three 
zone distance relay using impedance relays. Protection o f bus bars by using Differential protection. 
Static relays: Introduction – Classification of Static Relays – Basic Components of Static Relays. 
 
UNIT – V  
Protection against over voltage and grounding 
Generation of over voltages in power systems – Protection against lightning over voltages – Valve 
type and zinc oxide lighting arresters. Grounded and ungrounded neut ral systems – Effects of 
ungrounded neutral on system performance – Methods of neutral grounding: Solid –resistance–
Reactance–Arcing grounds and grounding Practices. 
     
Text Books: 
1. Power System Protection and Switchgear by Badri Ram and D.N Viswakarma - Tata McGraw 
Hill Publications - 2nd edition - 2011. 
2. Power system protection- Static Relays with microproces sor applications by T.S.Madhava 
Rao - Tata McGraw Hill - 2nd edition. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Fundamentals of Power System Protection by Paithankar and S.R.Bhide. - PHI - 2003. 
2. Art & Science of Protective Relaying – by C R Mason - Wiley Eastern Ltd. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/107/108107167 
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105167 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Professional Core Elective-II L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Advanced Control Systems 
 
Pre-requisite:  
Basic concepts of Control Systems. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To understand the concept of controllability, observability,  and their tests for continuous-
time systems, as well as the principle of duality in state-space analysis. 
 To understand the state-space methods to assess controllabili ty, observability, and design 
state feedback controllers via pole placement. 
 To know the stability of nonlinear systems using phase-plane a nalysis, describing functions, 
and Lyapunov9s stability theorems. 
 To Learn optimal control strategies using the calculus of variations, including constrained 
minimization and the minimum principle. 
 To learn Optimal control and state regulator problems. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, student will be able to  
CO1: Explain controllability, observability, and the principle of duality in state-space systems. 
CO2: Apply state-space methods to analyze controllability, observability, and design state  
   Feedback controllers. 
CO3: Analyze the stability of nonlinear systems using phase-plane analysis and Lyapunov's  
          stability theorems. 
CO4: Examine the minimization of functional and control variable inequality constraints. 
CO5: Formulate and solve the optimal regulator problems. 
 
UNIT – I  
Controllability - Observability and Design of Pole Placement 
General concepts of controllability and observability -Tes ts for controllability and observability for 
continuous time systems - Principle of duality - Effect  of state feedback on controllability and 
observability - Design of state feedback control through pole placement, full order and reduced 
order observers. 
 
UNIT – II  
Nonlinear Systems 
Introduction to nonlinear systems - Types of nonlinearities . Introduction to phase plane analysis, 
construction of phase trajectories-Analytical and Isocline m ethod, Describing function - Describing 
functions of on-off nonlinearity, on-off nonlinearity with hysteresis, and relay with dead zone. 
 
UNIT – III  
Stability analysis by Lyapunov Method 
Stability in the sense of Lyapunov – Lyapunov9s stability and Lyapunov9s instability theorems –  
Direct method of Lyapunov for the linear and nonlinear continuous time autonomous systems. 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT – IV  
Calculus of Variations 
Minimization of functionals - functionals of single fu nction – Constrained minimization – 
Minimum principle – Control variable inequality constraints – Control and state variable inequality 
constraints. 
 
UNIT –V  
Optimal Control 
Necessary conditions for optimal control, Formulation o f the optimal control problem, minimum 
time problem, minimum energy problem, minimum fuel problem, state regulator problem, output 
regulator problem. 
     
Text Books: 
1. Modern Control Engineering – by K. Ogata - Prentice Hall of India - 3rd edition -  1998. 
2. Automatic Control Systems by B.C. Kuo - Prentice Hall Publication. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Modern Control System Theory – by M. Gopal - New Age International Publishers -  2nd 
edition – 1996. 
2. Optimal control theory: an Introduction by Donald E.Kirk by Dover publications. 
3. Control Systems Engineering by I.J. Nagarath and M.Gopal - New Age International (P) Ltd. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/103/108103007 
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/107/108107115 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Professional Core Elective-II L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Renewable and Distributed Energy Technologies 
Pre-requisite: Power system I 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To understand the basic concepts on wind energy systems. 
 To understand the various relations between speed, power and energy in the wind 
systems. 
 To analyze the solar energy systems, various components  of solar thermal systems, 
applications in the relevant fields and design of PV systems. 
 To design the Hydel system components and to get an idea on different other sources 
like tidal, geothermal and gas based units. 
 To understand the concepts of hybrid renewable energy systems. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Illustrate basic concepts of renewable and distributed sources of wind energy. 
CO2: Demonstrate the components of wind energy conversion systems. 
CO3: Model PV systems and analyze MPPT Techniques. 
CO4: Illustrate the concept of Energy Production from Hydro - Tidal and Geothermal.  
CO5: Explain the aspects of hybrid renewable energy systems. 
 
UNIT – I 
Introduction and Wind energy systems 
Brief idea on renewable and distributed sources - their us efulness and advantages. Wind 
Energy Systems: Estimates of wind energy potential-wind ma ps- Aerodynamic and 
mechanical aspects of wind machine design - Conversion to electrical energy - Aspects of 
location of wind farms. 
 
UNIT – II 
Wind power and energy 
Wind speed and energy - Speed and power relations - Power extr action from wind - Tip speed 
ratio (TSR) -TSR characteristics- Functional structur e of wind energy conversion systems - 
Pitch and speed control - Power vs speedcharacteristics - Fixed speed and variable speed wind 
turbine control - Power optimization - Electrical gener ators - Self-Excited and Doubly-Fed 
Induction Generators operation and control. 
 
UNIT – III 
Solar PV Systems 
Present and new technological developments in photovoltai c -  estimation of solar irradiance -  
components of solar energy systems -  solarthermal s ystem- applications- Modelling of PV 
cell - current-voltage and power-voltage characteristics - Effects of temperature and irradiance 
-  Solar array simulator - Sun tracking - Peak power ope rations - PV system - MPPT 
techniques: Perturb and observe method, hill climbing and increment al conductance methods-
Effects of partial shading on the characteristic curves and associated MPPT techniques -  Solar 
park design outline-Solar Pond-Types of PV systems. 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT – IV 
Small Hydro and other sources 
Hydel:Small-Mini-Medium -Plant layouts Water power esti mates -use of hydrographs -
hydraulic turbine - characteristics and part load performan ce - design of wheels - draft tubes 
and penstocks. 
Other sources: Tidal - geothermal - gas-based generations. 
 
UNIT – V 
Hybrid Renewable systems 
Requirements of hybrid/combined use of different renewable an d distributed sources -Need of 
energy storage- Control of frequency and voltage of dist ributed generation in Stand-alone and 
Grid-connected mode - use of energy storage and power electr onics interfaces for the 
connection to grid and loads - Design and optimization of s ize of renewable sources andtheir 
storages. 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Math J. Bollen - Fainan Hassan 8Integration of Distributed Generation in th e Power 
System9 - IEEE Press - 2011. 
2. G.D.Rai 8Non-Conventional Energy Sources9 KHANNA PUBLISHERS.
 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Studies9 Craig Anderson and Rudolf I. Howard 8Wind and Hydropower  Integration: 
Concepts - Considerations and Case - Nova Publisher - 2012. 
2. Amanda E. Niemi and Cory M. Fincher 8Hydropower from Small and Low-Head Hydro 
Technologies9 - Nova Publisher - 2011. 
3. D. YogiGoswami - Frank Kreith and J an F. Kreider 8Principles of Solar Engineering9 - 
Taylor & Francis 2000. 
4. Math J. Bollen - Fainan Hassan 8Integration of Distributed Generation in th e Power 
System9 - IEEE Press - 2011. 
5. S. Heier and R. Waddington 8Grid Integration of Wind Energy C onversion Systems9 –  
Wiley - 2006. 
6. Loi Lei Lai and Tze Fun Chan 8Distributed Generation: In duction and Permanent 
Magnet Generators9 - Wiley-IEEE Press - 2007. 
7. G.N. Tiwari 8Solar Energy Technology9 - Nova Science Publishers - 2005. 
 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/103/103/103103206 
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/103/107/103107157 
 
 
  
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Professional Core Elective-III L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Electric Drives 
Pre-requisite: Electrical Circuit Analysis, Power electronics, Electric al Machines and Control 
Systems. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To learn the fundamentals of electric drive and different electric braking methods. 
 To analyze the operation of three phase converter-contr olled dc motors and four 
quadrant operation of dc motors using dual converters. 
 To discuss the DC-DCconverter control of dc motors. 
 To understand the concept of speed control of induction motor by using AC voltage 
controllers, voltage source inverters and slip power recovery scheme. 
 To learn the speed control mechanism of synchronous motors. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Explain the fundamentals of electric drive and different electric braking methods. 
CO2: Analyze the operation of three-phase converter fed dc motors and four quadrant 
operations of dc motors using dual converters. 
CO3: Describe the DC-DC converter fed control of dc motors in various quadrants of 
operation 
CO4: Know the concept of speed control of induction motor by using AC voltage 
controllers and voltage source inverters and differentia te the stator side control and 
rotor side control 
CO5: Learn the concepts of speed control of synchronous motor with different methods. 
 
UNIT - I 
Fundamentals of Electric Drives 
Electric drive and its components – Fundamental torque equation – Load torque components – 
Nature and classification of load torques – Steady state stability – Load equalization – Four 
quadrant operation of drive (hoist control) – Braking methods : Dynamic Braking, Plugging 
and Regenerative Braking –Numerical problems. 
 
UNIT - II 
Converter Fed DC Motor Drives 
Single phase half and fully-controlled converter fed separ ately and self-excited DC motor 
drive for continuous and discontinuous load current, 3-phase fully-controlled converter fed 
separately and self-excited DC motor drive for continuous lo ad current - Output voltage and 
current waveforms - Speed-torque characteristics and expre ssions – 3-phase Dual converter 
fed DC motor drives – Numerical problems. 
 
UNIT - III 
DC–DC Converter Fed DC Motor Drives 
Single quadrant, two quadrant and four quadrant DC-DC converter f ed separately excited and 
self-excited DC motors – Continuous Current Mode of operation - Output voltage and cur rent 
waveforms – Speed-torque characteristics and expressions – Closed loop operation (qualitative 
treatment only) – Numerical problems. 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT - IV 
Control of 3-phase Induction motor Drives 
Stator voltage control using 3-phase AC voltage regulators – Waveforms –Speed torque 
characteristics– Variable Voltage Variable Frequency control of induction moto r by PWM 
voltage source inverter – Closed loop V/f control of induction motor drives (qualitat ive 
treatment only). Static rotor resistance control – Slip power recovery schemes – Static 
Scherbius drive – Static Kramer drive – Performance and speed torque characteristics – 
Numerical problems. 
 
UNIT - V 
Control of Synchronous Motor Drives 
Permanent Magnet Synchronous Motor (PMSM): Basic operation  and advantages - Separate 
control of synchronous motor – self-control of synchronous motor employing load 
commutated thyristor inverter - closed loop control of sy nchronous motor drive (qualitative 
treatment only)–– Numerical problems. 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Fundamentals of Electric Drives – G K Dubey - Narosa Publications - 2 nd edition – 
2002. 
2. Power Semiconductor Drives - S.B.Dewan- G.R.Slemon - A.St raughen- Wiley India - 
1984. 
 
 Reference Books: 
 
1. Electric Motors and Drives Fundamentals - Types and Apllications- by Austin Hughes 
and Bill Drury - Newnes.4th edition - 2013. 
2. Thyristor Control of Electric drives – Vedam Subramanyam Tata McGraw Hill 
Publications - 1987. 
3. Power Electronic Circuits - Devices and applications by M.H.Rashid- PHI - 3rd edition 
- 2009. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104140 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108104011 
 
  
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Professional Elective-III L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Digital Signal Processing 
Pre-requisite: 
Laplace Transforms, Z- Transforms,Fourier series and transforms. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To explore the basic concepts of digital signal processing. 
 To connect the time domain signal to frequency domain sign als using Fourier 
transform. 
 To understand the basic structures of IRR systems. 
 To understand and design FIR Digital filters. 
 To explore the concepts of multiple sampling rates for DSP. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Know the concepts of Digital signal processing - frequency domain representation  
&z- transform. 
CO2: Compute discrete Fourier transform and fast Fourier transforms for different sequences. 
CO3: Design IIR filters through analog filter approximation and basic structure of IIR filters. 
CO4: Design FIR filters with window techniques and basic structure of FIR filters. 
CO5: Learn the concepts of Multirate Signal Processing. 
 
UNIT - I 
Introduction to Digital Signal Processing 
Discrete time signals & sequences - Classification of Discrete time systems - stability of LTI 
systems - Invertability - Response of LTI systems to arbit rary inputs. Solution of Linear constant 
coefficient difference equations. Frequency domain represe ntation of discrete time signals and 
systems.  Review of Z-transforms - solution of difference  equations using Z-transforms - System 
function. 
 
UNIT - II 
Discrete Fourier Transforms and FFT Algorithms 
Discrete Fourier Series representation of periodic sequences -Properties of Discrete Fourier Series - 
Discrete Fourier transforms: Properties of DFT - linear f iltering methods based on DFT - Fast 
Fourier transforms (FFT) - Radix-2 decimation in time and decimation in frequency FFT 
Algorithms - Inverse FFT. 
 
UNIT - III 
Design and Realizations of IIR Digital Filters 
Analog filter approximations – Butterworth and Chebyshev filters - Design of IIR Digital filters 
from analog filters withexamples. Analog and Digital frequency transformations.  
Basic structures of IIR systems – Direct-Form Structures - Transposed Structures - Cascade- Form 
Structures - Parallel-Form Structures Lattice and Lattice-Ladder Structures. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
UNIT - IV 
Design and Realizations of FIR Digital Filters 
Characteristics of FIR Filters with Linear Phase -Fr equency Response of Linear Phase FIR Filters - 
Design of FIR Digital Filters using Window Techniques and Frequenc y Sampling technique -  
Comparison of IIR & FIR filters. 
Basic structures of FIR systems – Direct-Form Structure - Cascade-Form Structures Linear Ph ase 
Realizations - Lattice structures. 
 
UNIT - V 
Multirate Digital Signal Processing 
Decimation –Interpolation-SamplingRate Conversion by a Rational Fac tor–Implementation of 
sampling rate converters–Applications of Multirate Signal Processing-Digital Filter Banks. 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Digital Signal Processing - PrinciplesAlgorithms and Applica tions: John G. Proakis -  
Dimitris G.Manolakis -  4th Edition -  Pearson Education / PHI -  2007. 
2. Discrete Time Signal Processing – A.V.Oppenheim and R.W. Schaffer -  PHI. 
3. Digital Signal Processing: A Computer based approach. Sanjit K Mitra -  4 th Edition -  TMH 
-  2014. 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Digital Signal Processing: Andreas Antoniou -  TATA McGraw Hill  -  2006. 
2. Digital Signal Processing: MH Hayes -  Schaum9s Outlines -  TATA Mc-Graw Hill -  2007. 
3. DSP Primer - C. Britton Rorabaugh -  Tata McGraw Hill -  2005. 
4. Fundamentals of Digital Signal Processing using Matlab – Robert J. Schilling -  Sandra 
L.Harris - Thomson -  2007. 
5. Digital Signal Processing – Alan V. Oppenheim -  Ronald W. Schafer -  PHI Ed. -  2006. 
6. Digital Signal Processing – K Raja Rajeswari -  1st edition -  I.K. International Publishing -  
House -  2014. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117102060 
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/101/108101174 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Professional Core Elective-III 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
High Voltage Engineering 
 
Pre-requisite: 
Material Science, Electromagnetic Fields and Basics of Transient Circuits. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To understand HV breakdown phenomena in gases. 
 To understand the breakdown phenomenon of liquids and solid dielectrics. 
 To acquaint with the generating principle of operation and des ign of HVDC, AC 
voltages. 
 To understand the generating principles of Impulse voltages & currents. 
 To understand various techniques for AC, DC and Impulse measur ements of high 
voltages and currents. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Recognise the dielectric properties of gaseous materials used in HV equipment. 
CO2: Differentiate the break down phenomenon in liquid and solid dielectric materials. 
CO3: Acquaint with the techniques of generation of high AC and DC voltages  
CO4: Acquaint with the techniques of generation of high Impulse voltages and currents. 
CO5: Getting the knowledge of measurement of high AC -  DC -  Impulse voltages and  
currents. 
 
UNIT - I 
Break down phenomenon in Gaseous and Vacuum: 
Insulating Materials: Types, properties and its applicatio ns. Gases as insulating media – 
Collision process – Ionization process – Townsend9s criteria of breakdown in gases and its 
limitations – Streamers Theory of break down – time lag – Paschen9s law- Paschen9s curve, 
Penning Effect.Breakdown mechanisms in Vacuum. 
 
UNIT - II 
Break down phenomenon in Liquids: 
Liquid as Insulator – Pure and commercial liquids – Breakdown in pure and commercial 
liquids- Mechanisms. 
Break down phenomenon in Solids: 
Intrinsic breakdown – Electromechanical breakdown – Thermal breakdown –Breakdown of 
composite solid dielectrics. 
 
UNIT - III 
Generation of High DC voltages: 
Voltage Doubler Circuit - Voltage Multiplier Circuit – Vande- Graaff Generator. 
Generation of High AC voltages:  
Cascaded Transformers – Resonant Transformers –Tesla Coil. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT - IV 
Generation of Impulse voltages: 
Specifications of impulse wave – Analysis of RLC circuits - Marx Circuit. 
Generation of Impulse currents: 
Definitions – Circuits for producing Impulse current waves – Wave shape control - Tripping 
and control of impulse generators. 
 
UNIT - V 
Measurement of High DC & AC Voltages: 
Resistance potential divider - Generating Voltmeter - Capac itor Voltage Transformer (CVT) - 
Electrostatic Voltmeters – Sphere Gaps. 
Measurement of Impulse Voltages & Currents: 
Potential dividers with CRO - Hall Generator - Rogowski Coils. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. High Voltage Engineering: Fundamentals by E.Kuffel -  W.S.Zaengl -  J.Kuffel by Elsevier -  
2nd Edition. 
2. High Voltage Engineering by M.S.Naidu and V. Kamaraju – TMH Publications -  3rd 
Edition. 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. High Voltage Engineering and Technology by Ryan -  IET Publishers -  2nd edition. 
2. High Voltage Engineering by C.L.Wadhwa -  New Age Internationals (P) Limited – 1997. 
3. High Voltage Insulation Engineering by RavindraArora -  Wolfgang Mosch -  New Age 
International (P) Limited -  1995. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104048 
2. https://bharatsrajpurohit.weebly.com/high-voltage-engineering-course.html 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Open Elective-II 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Fundamentals of Electric Vehicles 
 
Pre-requisite: 
Basic knowledge in Physics, Chemistry and Basics of Electrical and Electronics.  
 
Course Objectives: 
 To familiarize the students with the need and advantages of electric and hybrid electric 
vehicles. 
 To understand various power converters used in electric vehicles. 
 To be familiar all the different types of motors suitable for electric vehicles. 
 To know various architecture of hybrid electric vehicles. 
 To have knowledge on latest developments in batteries and other storage systems. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Illustrate the use and advantages of different types of electric vehicles. 
CO2: Use suitable power converters for EV application. 
CO3: Select suitable electric motor for EV power train. 
CO4: Design HEV configuration for a specific application. 
CO5: Analysevarious storage systems and battery management system for EVs. 
 
UNIT – I 
Introduction 
Fundamentals of vehicles – Vehicle model – Calculation road load and tractive force –
Components of conventional vehicles – Drawbacks of conventional vehicles – Need for 
electric vehicles – Advantages and applications of Electric Vehicles – History of Electric 
Vehicles – EV Market in India and outside India –Types of Electric Vehicles. 
 
UNIT – II 
Components of Electric Vehicles 
Main components of Electric Vehicles – Electric Traction MotorandController –Power 
Converters – Rectifiers used in EVs – Bidirectional DC –DC Converters – Voltage Source 
Inverters – PWM inverters used in EVs. 
 
UNIT – III 
Motors for Electric Vehicles 
Characteristics of traction drive – requirements of electric machines for EVs – Comparison of 
Different motors for Electric and Hybrid Vehicles – Induction Motors – Synchronous Motors 
– Permanent Magnetic Synchronous Motors – Brushless DC Motors – Switched Reluctance 
Motors (Construction details and working only). 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
UNIT – IV 
Hybrid Electric Vehicles  
Evolution of Hybrid Electric Vehicles – Advantages and Applications of Hybrid Electric 
Vehicles – Architecture of HEVs – Series and Parallel HEVs – Complex HEVs – Range 
extended HEVs – Examples – Merits and Demerits.   
 
UNIT – V 
Energy Sources for Electric Vehicles  
Batteries– Types of Batteries – Lithium-ion – Nickel-metal hydride – Lead-acid – Comparison 
of Batteries – Battery Charging – Fast Charging –Battery Management System – Ultra 
capacitors – Flywheels – Compressed air energy storage (CAES)– Fuel Cell – it9s working. 
 
Text Books 
1. Iqbal Hussein - Electric and Hybrid Vehicles: Design Fundamentals - CRC Press - 2021.  
2. Tom Denton, Hayley Pells - Electric and hybrid vehicles, Third Edition, 2024 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Kumar - L. Ashok -and S. Albert Alexander. Power Converte rs for Electric Vehicles. 
CRC Press - 2020. 
2. Chau - Kwok Tong. Electric vehicle machines and drives: design - analysis and 
application. John Wiley & Sons - 2015. 
3. Berg - Helena. Batteries for electric vehicles: materia ls and electrochemistry. Cambridge 
University Press - 2015. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. MOOC at https://www.edx.org/learn/electric-cars 
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/106/108106170 
 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Open Elective-II 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Electrical Wiring Estimation and Costing 
 
Pre-requisite:  
Electrical Circuits, Basics of Power Systems and Electrical Machines. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 Introduce the electrical symbols and simple electrical circuits 
 Able to learn the design of electrical installations. 
 Able to learn the design of electrical installation for different types of buildings and 
small industries. 
 Learn the basic components of electrical substations. 
 Familiarize with the motor control circuits 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Demonstrate the various electrical apparatus and their interconnections. 
CO2: Examine various components of electrical installations. 
CO3: Estimate the cost for installation of wiring for different types of building and small 
industries. 
CO4: Illustrate the components of electrical substations. 
CO5: Design suitable control circuit for starting of three phase induction motor and 
synchronous motor. 
 
UNIT - I 
Electrical Symbols and Simple Electrical Circuits 
Identification of electrical symbols - Electrical wiring Diagrams - Methods of representation of 
wiring diagrams - introduction to simple light and fan circu its - system of connection of 
appliances and accessories. 
 
UNIT - II 
Design Considerations of Electrical Installations 
Electric supply system - Three-phase four wire distribut ion system - protection of electric 
installation against overload - short circuit and earth f ault - earthing - neutral and earth wire - 
types of loads - systems of wiring - permissible of vol tage drops and sizes of wires - 
estimating and costing of electrical installations. 
 
UNIT - III 
Electrical Installation for Different Types of Buildings and Small Industries 
Electrical installations for electrical buildings - esti mating and costing of material - simple 
examples on electrical installation for residential bu ildings -electrical installations for 
commercial buildings - electrical installation for small industries-case study. 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT - IV 
Substations 
Introduction - types of substations - outdoor substations -pole mounted type - indoor 
substations-floor mounted type - simple examples on quantity estimation-case studies. 
 
UNIT - V 
Motor control circuits 
Introduction to AC motors - starting of three phase squir rel cage induction motors - starting of 
wound rotor motors - starting of synchronous motors - contractor  control circuit components - 
basic control circuits - motor protection –Schematic and wiring diagrams for motor control 
circuits. 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Electrical Design and Estimation Costing - K. B. Raina and S.K.Bhattacharya – New 
Age International Publishers - 2007. 
 
References Books: 
 
1. Electrical wiring estimating and costing – S.L.Uppal and G.C.Garg – Khanna 
publishers - 6th edition - 1987. 
2. A course in electrical installation estimating and cost ing – J.B.Gupta –Kataria SK & 
Sons -  2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Open Elective-II 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Utilization of Electrical Energy 
 
Course Objectives:  
The objectives of this course is to acquire knowledge on  
 operating principles and characteristics of electric drives.  
 different types of electric heating and welding techniques.  
 basics of illumination and design of lightning system.  
 features of traction motor and speed time curves.  
 basic principle and method of calculation for tractive effort 
 
Course Outcomes:  
The students should be able to  
 identify a suitable motor for electric drives and industrial applications 
 identify most appropriate heating or welding techniques for suitable applications.  
 estimate the illumination levels 
 design determine the speed/time characteristics of different types of traction motors.  
 estimate energy consumption levels at various modes of operation. 
 
UNITI  
Selection of Motors  
Choice of motor, type of electric drives, starting and runni ng characteristics –Speed control –
Temperature riseApplications of electric drives –Types of industrial loads –continuous–Intermittent 
and variable loads–Load equalization. 
 
UNIT II 
Electric Heating  
Advantages and methods of electric heating –Resistance heating induction heating and dielectric 
heating – Arc furnaces – Direct and indirect arc furnaces  
Electric Welding  
Electric welding–Resistance and arc welding–Electric welding equipment–Comparison between AC 
and DC Welding  
 
UNIT III 
Illumination fundamentals  
Introduction, terms used in illumination–Laws of illumination–Polar curves–Integrating sphere–Lux 
meter Discharge lamps, MV and SV lamps – Lumen or flux method of calculation - Sources of 
light. Various Illumination Methods, Comparison between tun gsten filament lamps and fluorescent 
tubes–Basic principles of light control – Types and Design of lighting and flood lighting –LED 
lighting, principle of operation, street lighting and domestic lighting.  
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT IV 
Electric Traction – I  
System of electric traction and track electrification – Review of existing electric traction systems in 
India– Special features of traction motor – Mechanics of train movement –Speed–time curves for 
different services – Trapezoidal and quadrilateral speed time curves-High speed tr ansportation 
trains.  
 
UNIT V 
Electric Traction – II  
Calculations of tractive effort – power –Specific energy consumption for given run –Effect of 
varying  
acceleration and braking retardation–Adhesive weight and braking, retardation adhesive weight an d 
coefficient of adhesion–Principles of energy efficient motors-Modern traction motors.  
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Utilization of Electric Energy – by E. Openshaw Taylor, Orient Longman.  
2. Art & Science of Utilization of electrical Energy – by Partab, DhanpatRai&Sons.
 
 
Reference Books:   
 
1. Utilization of Electrical Power including Electric drives and Electric traction – by 
N.V.Suryanarayana, New Age International (P) Limited, Publishers, 1996.  
2. Generation, Distribution and Utilization of electrical E nergy – by C.L. Wadhwa, New Age 
International (P) Limited, Publishers, 1997. 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Professional Core Lab - 1 L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
Electrical Measurements and Instrumentation Lab 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To understand students how different types of meters work and their construction. 
 To make the students understand how to measure resistance, inductance and capacitance 
by AC & DC bridges. 
 To understand the testing of CT and PT. 
 To Understand and the characteristics of Thermo couples, LVDT, Capacitive 
transducer, piezoelectric transducer and measurement of st rain and choke coil 
parameters. 
 To study the procedure for standardization and calibration of various methods. 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Know about the phantom loading and calibration process. 
CO2: Measure the electrical parameters voltage - current - power- energy and electrical 
characteristics of resistance - inductance and capacitance. 
CO3: Gain the skill knowledge of various bridges and their applications. 
CO4: Learn the usage of CT9s - PT9s for measurement purpose. 
CO5: Know the characteristics of transducers and measure the strains - frequency and  
phase difference. 
 
Any 10 of the following experiments are to be conducted 
1. Calibration of dynamometer wattmeter using phantom loading  
2. Measurement of resistance using Kelvin9s double Bridge and Deter mination of its 
tolerance. 
3. Measurement of Capacitance using Schering Bridge. 
4. Measurement of Inductance using Anderson Bridge. 
5. Calibration of LPF Wattmeter by direct loading. 
6. Measurement of 3 phase reactive power using single wattmete r method for a balanced 
load. 
7. Testing of C.T. using mutual inductor – Measurement of % ratio error and phase angle 
of given C.T. by Null deflection method. 
8. P.T. testing by comparison – Vibration Galvanometer as Null detector – Measurement 
of percentage ratio error and phase angle error of the given P.T. 
9. Determination of the characteristics of a Thermocouple. 
10. Determination of the characteristics of a LVDT. 
11. Determination of the characteristics for a capacitive transducer. 
12. Measurement of strain for a bridge strain gauge. 
13. Measurement of Choke coil parameters  
14. Measurement of single-phase power using three voltmeter method. 
15. Measurement of single-phase power usingthree ammeter method. 
16. Calibration of single-phaseInduction Type Energy Meter. 
17. Calibration of DC ammeter and voltmeter using Crompton DC Potentiometer. 
18. AC Potentiometer : Polar Form / Cartesian Form - Cal ibration of AC voltmeter - 
Parameters of choke.  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Professional Core lab - 2 L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
Microprocessors and Microcontrollers Lab 
 
 
Course Objectives 
 To understand the architecture and operation of 8086 microprocessor and 8051 microcontroller. 
 To develop assembly language programs for 8086 and 8051. 
 To interface memory and peripherals with 8086 and 8051. 
 To understand the operation of programmable interface devices like 8255. 
 To implement real-time applications using microcontrollers  interfaced with sensors, motors, and 
displays. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After successful completion of this course, students will be able to: 
 
 Describe the internal architecture of 8086 and 8051. 
 Develop and execute assembly language programs for 8086 and 8051. 
 Interface peripheral devices such as LCDs, keypads, and motors with 8051. 
 Demonstrate interfacing of RAM, ROM, ADC, DAC, and sensor modules with microprocessors 
and microcontrollers. 
 Analyze and implement microcontroller-based real-world applications. 
 
List of Experiments: 
1. Write a data transfer program using different addressing modes  in assembly language 
programming. 
2. Perform arithmetic operations on 8 bit and 16-bit numbers in assembly language programming.  
3. Data transfer program using string instruction in assembly language programming. 
4. Program for data conversion in assembly language programming.   
5.   Implement stack operations using PUSH and POP instructions. 
6. Write assembly language program using procedure. 
7. Write assembly language program using macro. 
8. Program to reject negative numbers from a series of bytes. 
9. Interfacing 8086 with 8255 PPI to display data on LEDs. 
10. Perform Arithmetic operations on 8bit numbers in assembly  language programming using 8051 
microcontrollers. 
11. Program to toggle the LED. 
12. Programming and interfacing of traffic light logic. 
13. Program to generate square wave using interrupts.     
14. Programming and interfacing of the key pad matrix. 
15. Programming and interfacing of seven-segment display. 
16. Programming and interfacing of the LCD 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
17. Programming and interfacing of the relay. 
18. Programming and interfacing of the dc/Stepper motor. 
 
Text Books 
1 Douglas V. Hall, Microprocessors and Interfacing: Programming an d Hardware, Tata McGraw-
Hill. 
2 Ramesh S. Gaonkar, Microprocessor Architecture, Programming and Applications with the 8085, 
Penram International. 
3 Muhammad Ali Mazidi& Janice Gillispie Mazidi, The 8051 Microco ntroller and Embedded 
Systems, Pearson Education. 
 
Reference Books: 
1 Kenneth Ayala, The 8051 Microcontroller, Cengage Learning. 
2 Barry B. Brey, The Intel Microprocessors 8086/88, 80186/188, 80286, 80386, an d 80486, Pearson 
Education. 
3 Krishna Kant, Microprocessors and Microcontrollers: Archi tecture, Programming and System 
Design, PHI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Skill Enhancement course L T P C 
0 1 2 2 
IoT Applications of Electrical Engineering Lab 
Pre-requisite: Concepts of Computer Organization, Computer Networks.  
 
Course Objectives: 
 To understand the working of Arduino. 
 To learn the programming of Raspberry PI. 
 To know various sensors with Arduino/Raspberry Pi. 
 To interface various displays with Arduino/Raspberry Pi. 
 To connect with various wireless communication devices 
 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course - students will be able to: 
CO1:Operate the Arduino Integrated Development Environment with embedded c. 
CO2: Program the embedded Python in Raspberry Pi OS. 
CO3: Interface various sensorswithArduino/Raspberry Pi in the IoT environment. 
CO4:Connectdifferent displayswith Arduino/Raspberry Pi 
C05:Interconnect with wireless communication technologies
. 
 
Topics to be covered in Tutorials 
 
Module–1: Programming using Arduino: (3hrs) 
Arduino - Classification of Arduino Boards - Pin diagram s – Arduino Integrated Development 
Environment (IDE) – Programming using Arduino. 
 
Module–2: Sensors: (5hrs) 
Working of temperature sensor, proximity sensor, IR sensor,  Light sensor, ultrasonic sensor, PIR Sensor, 
Colour sensor, Soil Sensor, Heart Beat Sensor, Fire Alar ms etc.  Actuators: Stepper Motor, Servo Motor 
andtheir integration with Arduino/Raspberry Pi. 
 
Module–3: Raspberry Pi: (2hrs) 
Introduction, Classification of Rasperberry Pi Series - Pin diagrams – Programming Rasperberry Pi. 
 
Module–4: Display: (2hrs) 
Working of LEDs, LED, OLED display, LCDs, Seven Segment  Display, Touch Screen etc. Analog Input 
and Digital Output Converter etc. and their integration with Arduino/Raspberry Pi. 
 
Module–5: Wireless Communication Devices: (4hrs) 
Working of Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, Radio Frequency Identification  (RFID), GPRS/GSM Technology, ZigBee, 
etc and their integration with Arduino/Raspberry Pi. Features of Alexa.  
 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
List of experiments 
Any 10 of the following experiments are to be conducted: 
 
1. Familiarization with Arduino/Raspberry Pi and perform necessary software installation. 
2. Interfacing of LED/Buzzer with Arduino/Raspberry Pi and write a program to turn ON LED for 1 
sec after every 2 seconds. 
3. Interfacing of Push button/Digital sensor (IR/LDR) with Arduino/Raspberry Pi and write a 
program to turn ON LED when push button is pressed or at sensor detection. 
4. Interfacing of temperature sensor with Arduino/Raspberry Pi and write a program to print 
temperature and humidity readings. 
5. Interfacing of Organic Light Emitting Diode (OLED) with Arduino/Raspberry Pi  
6. Interfacing of Bluetooth with Arduino/Raspberry Pi and write a program to send sensor data to 
smartphone using Bluetooth. 
7. Interfacing of Bluetooth with Arduino/Raspberry Pi and write a program to turn LED ON/OFF 
when 819/909 is received from smartphone using Bluetooth. 
8. Write a program on Arduino/Raspberry Pi to upload and retrieve temperature and humidity data to 
thingspeak cloud. 
9. Interfacing of 7 Segment Display with Arduino/Raspberry Pi  
10. Interfacing of Joystick with Arduino/Raspberry Pi  
11. Interfacing of Analog Input & Digital Output with Arduino/Raspberry Pi  
12. Night Light Controlled & Monitoring System 
13. Interfacing of Fire Alarm Using Arduino/Raspberry Pi 
14. IR Remote Control for Home Appliances 
15. A Heart Rate Monitoring System 
16. Alexa based Home Automation System 
 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Year – II SEMESTER Audit Course L T P C 
2 0 0 0 
Research Methodology 
 
Course Objectives 
 To introduce the fundamentals of research and its methodologies. 
 To equip students with the skills needed to identify research problems and design effective 
research strategies. 
 To develop understanding of quantitative and qualitative research techniques. 
 To familiarize students with literature review, citation, and plagiarism avoidance. 
 To prepare students to write research proposals, reports, and academic papers. 
Course Outcomes 
Upon successful completion of the course, students will be able to 
 Formulate and define a research problem with clear objectives. 
 Design a research methodology suitable for different types of problems. 
 Apply appropriate tools for data collection, analysis, and interpretation. 
 Conduct a structured literature review using academic databases and tools. 
 Write high-quality research proposals, papers, and reports adhering to academic standards. 
 
Unit I:  
Introduction to Research 
Meaning and objectives of research 
Types of research (Basic, Applied, Qualitative, Quantitative, Mixed methods), Research approaches and 
ethics, Characteristics of good research, Research process overview 
 
Unit II:  
Research Problem & Design 
Identifying and defining a research problem, Review of literature and gap analysis, Hypothesis 
formulation, Research design – Exploratory, Descriptive, Experimental, Diagnostic, Variables and 
sampling techniques 
 
Unit III:  
Data Collection Methods 
Primary and secondary data, Methods of data collection: s urveys, interviews, observations, 
questionnaires, Measurement scales: Nominal, Ordinal, Interv al, Ratio, Reliability and validity, Use of 
online tools for survey and data collection (Google Forms, etc.) 
 
Unit IV:  
Data Analysis and Interpretation 
Descriptive statistics – mean, median, mode, standard deviation, Inferential stat istics – correlation, 
regression, hypothesis testing, Use of software tools like Excel/SPSS/R for analysis, Data visualization: 
tables, charts, graphs, Interpretation of results 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
Unit V:  
Research Documentation and Report Writing 
Research paper structure and writing style, Plagiarism and reference management tools (Zotero, 
Mendeley), Citation styles – APA, IEEE, MLA, Research proposal writing, Publishing in journals, 
conferences, patents – overview 
 
Textbooks 
1. C.R. Kothari, Research Methodology: Methods and Techniques, New Age International 
Publishers. 
2. Ranjit Kumar, Research Methodology: A Step-by-Step Guide for Beginners, SAGE Publications. 
Reference Books 
1. John W. Creswell, Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches, 
SAGE. 
2. Wayne Goddard & Stuart Melville, Research Methodology: An Introduction. 
3. Uma Sekaran, Research Methods for Business: A Skill Building Approach, Wiley. 
4. Leedy & Ormrod, Practical Research: Planning and Design, Pearson. 
5. Research articles from journals like IEEE, Elsevier, Springer, Taylor & Francis (for case-based 
teaching). 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
B.Tech. IV Year-I Semester 
 
S.No Category Course 
Code Title L T P C 
1 PC  Power System Operation and Control 3 0 0 3 
2 Management 
Course-II  Energy Management & Auditing 2 0 0 2 
3 PCE – IV  
1. HVDC Transmission 
2. FACTS 
3. Design of PV systems 
3 0 0 3 
4 PCE - V  
1. Electric Vehicles 
2. Switched Mode Power Conversion 
3. Electrical Distribution System 
3 0 0 3 
5 OE - III  
1. Battery Management Systems  
2. Concepts of Smart Grid 
Technologies 
3. Introduction to Artificial Intelligence 
(APSCHE) 
3 0 0 3 
6 OE - IV  
1. Concepts of Power Quality 
2. Programmable Logic Controllers  
3. Quantum Computing (APSCHE) 
3 0 0 3 
7 SEC  Power Systems Simulation Lab 0 0 4 2 
8 AC  Constitution of India 2 0 0 0 
9 Internship  
Evaluation of Industry 
Internship 
(done during III-II Summer Vacation – 8 
Weeks) 
0 0 0 2 
Total 1
9 
0 4 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER 
Professional Core L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Power System Operation and Control 
 
Course Objectives: 
The objectives of this course is to acquire knowledge on  
 optimal dispatch of generation with and without losses.  
 optimal scheduling of hydro thermal systems.  
 optimal unit commitment problem.  
 load frequency control for single and two area systems with and without controllers  
 reactive power control and compensation of transmission lines.  
 
Course Outcomes:  
 
 compute optimal scheduling of Generators.  
 Compute hydrothermal scheduling.  
 solve unit commitment problem.  
 design PID controllers in single area and two area systems.  
 apply reactive power control and compensation for transmission line.  
 
 
UNIT–I:  
Economic Operation of Power Systems  
Optimal operation of Generators in Thermal power stations,  – Heat rate curve – Cost Curve – 
Incremental fuel and Production costs – Input –output characteristics – Optimum generation 
allocation with line losses neglected – Optimum generation allocation including the effect of 
transmission line losses – Loss Coefficients – General transmission line loss formula.  
 
UNIT–II:  
Hydrothermal Scheduling  
Optimal scheduling of Hydrothermal System: Hydroelectric power plant models – Scheduling 
problems – Short term hydrothermal scheduling problem.  
 
UNIT–III:  
Unit Commitment   
Optimal unit commitment problem – Need for unit commitment – Constraints in unit commitment – 
Cost function formulation – Solution methods – Priority ordering – Dynamic programming.  
 
UNIT–IV:  
Load Frequency Control  
Modeling of steam turbine - Modeling of Hydro turbine – Generator – Mathematical modeling of 
speed governing system – Transfer function –Necessity of keeping frequency constant –Control 
area – Single area power system – Block diagram representation of an isolated power system  – 
Steady state analysis - Dynamic response of Uncontrolled case. Proportional plus Integral control of 
single area- Steady State Response .Tieline bias contro l, Block diagram development of Load 
Frequency Control of two area system- uncontrolled case  and controlled case, Economic dispatch 
control.  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
UNIT–V:  
Reactive Power Control  
Overview of Reactive Power control – Reactive Power compensation in transmission systems – 
Advantages and disadvantages of different types of compensating equipment for transmission   
systems – Load compensation – Specifications of load compensator – Uncompensated and 
compensated transmission lines: Shunt and series compensation.  
 
Text Books:   
1. Electric Energy systems Theory – by O.I.Elgerd, Tata McGraw–Hill Publishing Company 
Ltd., Second edition.  
2. Modern Power System Analysis – by I.J.Nagrath&D.P.Kothari Tata McGraw Hill 
Publishing Company Ltd, 2nd edition.  
Reference Books:  
1. Power System Analysis and Design by J.Duncan Glover and M.S.Sarma., 
Thompson,3rdEdition.  
2. Power System Analysis by Grainger and Stevenson, Tata McGraw Hill.  
3. Power System Analysis by HadiSaadat – TMH Edition.  
4. Power System stability & control, PrabhaKundur,TMH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER 
Management Course-II L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Energy Management & Auditing 
Course Objectives:  
The objectives of this course is to acquire knowledge on  
 energy efficiency, scope, conservation and technologies.  
 design energy efficient lighting systems.  
 estimation /calculate power factor of systems and propose suitable compensation techniques.  
 energy conservation in HVAC systems.  
 costing analysis and return on investment on energy efficient technologies. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
The student should be able to  
 explain energy efficiency, conservation and various technologies.  
 design energy efficient lighting systems.  
 calculate power factor of systems and propose suitable compensation techniques.  
 explain energy conservation in HVAC systems.  
 calculate life cycle costing analysis and return on investment on energy efficient 
technologies. 
 
Unit-I: 
Basic Principles of Energy Audit and management  
Energy audit - Definitions - Concept - Types of audit -  Energy index - Cost index - Pie charts - 
Sankey diagrams - Load profiles - Energy conservation s chemes and energy saving potential - 
Numerical problems - Principles of energy management - Initiating, planning, controlling, 
promoting, monitoring, reporting - Energy manager - Qualities a nd functions - Language - 
Questionnaire - Check list for top management.  
 
Unit-II:  
Lighting  
Modification of existing systems - Replacement of exist ing systems - Priorities: Definition of terms 
and units - Luminous efficiency - Polar curve - Calcula tion of illumination level - Illumination of 
inclined surface to beamLuminance or brightness - Types of la mps - Types of lighting - Electric 
lighting fittings (luminaries) - Flood lighting - White li ght LED and conducting Polymers - Energy 
conservation measures.  
 
Unit-III:  
Power Factor and energy instruments  
Power factor - Methods of improvement - Location of capa citors - Power factor with non linear 
loads - Effect of harmonics on Power factor - Numerical  problems. Energy Instruments - Watt-hour 
meter - Data loggers Thermocouples - Pyrometers - Lux meters - Tong testers - Power analyzer.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Unit-IV:  
Space Heating and Ventilation  
Ventilation - Air-Conditioning (HVAC) and Water Heating: Intr oduction - Heating of buildings - 
Transfer of Heat-Space heating methods - Ventilation and air-conditioning - Insulation-Cooling 
load - Electric water heating systems - Energy conservation methods.  
 
Unit-V  
Economic Aspects and Analysis  
Economics Analysis - Depreciation Methods - Time value of money - Rate of return - Present worth 
method - Replacement analysis - Life cycle costing ana lysis - Energy efficient motors (basic 
concepts). Calculation of simple payback method - Net pres ent worth method - Power factor 
correction - Lighting - Applications of life cycle costing analysis - Return on investment. 
 
 
Text Books:  
1. Energy management by W.R. Murphy & G. Mckay Butter worth,  Elsevier publications. 
2012  
2. Energy efficient electric motors by John .C. Andreas, M arcel Dekker Inc Ltd-2nd edition, 
1995 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Electric Energy Utilization and Conservation by S C Tripa thy, Tata McGraw hill publishing 
company  
2. Ltd. New Delhi.  
3. Energy management by Paul o9 Callaghan, Mc-Graw Hill Book company-1st edition, 1998.  
4. Energy management hand book by W.C.Turner, John wiley and sons.  
5. Energy management and conservation –K V Sharma and P Venkata Seshaiah-I K 
International  
6. Publishing House pvt.ltd,2011.  
7. 
http://www.energvmanagertraining.com/download/Gazette of IndiaPartIISe cI-37 25-08-
2010.pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER 
Professional CoreElective - IV L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
HVDC Transmission  
 
Course Objectives:  
 To analyse the operation of HVDC converters.  
 To learn the principles of HVDC system control.  
 To learn about converters faults and protection schemes of HVDC systems.  
 To understand the requirements of reactive power control and filtering technique in HVDC  
 system.  
 To learn about MTDC systems and DC circuit breakers. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to:  
 Learn the basic concepts of HVDC Transmission & their converters.  
 Understand the HVDC System Control Strategies with respect to protection.  
 Understand the concepts of HVDC systems protection.  
 Understand the various sources of reactive power   
 Understand the Multi Terminal HVDC Systems. 
 
UNIT - I  
DC Power Transmission Technology  
Introduction - Historical Development - Comparison of A C and DC transmission - types of DC 
links - Existing HVDC Projects in INDIA. Modern Trends in HVDC Technology.  
Analysis of HVDC Converters Three Phase 6-Pulse bridge conv erter - simplified analysis - 
waveform with and without overlap -Current and voltage rel ationship - Equivalent circuits of 
converters - Analysis of 12 pulse converters.  
 
UNIT - II  
HVDC System Control  
Principles of DC link control - converter control characteristics - constant current and constant  
extinction angle control - constant ignition angle c ontrol - starting and stopping of HVDC link - 
power control & power reversal in HVDC link.  
 
UNIT - III  
Converter Faults and Protection  
Over voltages in converter station - Surge arrestors - P rotection against over voltages and over 
currents. Converter faults - Protection against faults in voltage source converter-Smoothing Reactor 
- Transient over voltages for DC line – Protection of DC lines.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT - IV  
Reactive Power Control  
Sources of reactive power - Static VAR system – SVC and STATCOM - Reactive power control 
during transients. Harmonics & Filters Generation of harmoni cs – Types and design of various AC 
filters - DC filters – Active Filters. 
 
UNIT - V  
Multi Terminal HVDC Systems & DC Circuit Breakers  
Types of MTDC systems - Control and Protection of MTDC system – HVDC insulation – DC line  
insulators – DC breakers – Characteristics and types of DC breakers. 
 
Text Books 
 
1. K. R. Padiyar - <HVDC Power Transmission Systems Tech nology and System 
Interactions= New Age International (p) Limited - New Delhi - 2003.  
2. Edward Wilson Kimbark - <Direct current Transmission= - WileyInterscience - Vol. I - 
New York - 1971.  
 
Reference Books  
1. Vijay K. Sood - <HVDC and FACTS Controller: Application of Static Converters in power  
systems= - IEEE Power Electronics and Power Systems series - Kluwe r Academic 
publishers - Boston - First edition January 2004.  
2. C. Adamson and N.G. Hingorani - <High voltage DC power Transmission= - Garraway  
Limited - England - 1960.   
3. Mohan - Undeland and Robbins - <Power Electronics Converters - Applications and Design 
- John Wiley & Son - Inc. - 2003.  
4. J. Arrialga - <HVDC Transmission= - Peter Peregrinus Ltd. - London - 1983. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Professional Core Elective - I L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
FLEXIBLE ALTERNATING CURRENT  
TRANSMISSION SYSTEMS 
 
 
Course Objectives:  
The objectives of this course is to acquire knowledge on  
i. basics of power flow control in transmission lines using FACTS controllers.  
ii. operation and control of voltage and current source converter.  
iii. shunt compensation using static VAR compensators. 
iv. series compensation methods.  
v. operation of Unified Power Flow Controller (UPFC). 
 
Course Outcomes 
 The students should be able to 
 know the power flow control in transmission lines using facts controllers.  
 explain the operation and control of voltage and current source converter  
 analyze method of shunt compensation using static var compensators.  
 evaluate different methods of compensation using series compensators.  
 apply unified power flow controller (UPFC) on transmission systems. 
 
Unit I  
Introduction to FACTS Power flow in an AC System 
Loading capability limits – Dynamic stability considerations – Importance of controllable 
parameters – Basic types of FACTS controllers – Benefits from FACTS controllers – Requirements 
and characteristics of high-power devices – Voltage and current rating – Losses and speed of 
switching – Parameter trade–off devices. 
 
Unit II 
Voltage source and Current source converters  
Concept of voltage source converter(VSC) – Single phase bridge converter – Square–wave voltage 
harmonics for a single –phase bridge converter – Three–phase full wave bridge converter – Three–
phase current source converter – Comparison of current source converter with voltage sour ce 
converter. 
 
Unit III   
Shunt Compensators 
Objectives of shunt compensation – Mid–point voltage regulation for line segmentation – End of 
line voltage support to prevent voltage instability – Improvement of transient stability – Power 
oscillation damping. Thyristor Switched Capacitor (TSC) – Thyristor Controlled Reactor (TCR). 
Static VAR compensator (SVC) and Static Compensator (STATC OM): The regulation and slope 
transfer function and dynamic performance –Transient stability enhancement and power oscillation 
damping– Operating point control and summary of compensation control. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
Unit IV 
Series Compensators 
Static series compensators: Concept of series capaciti ve compensation – Improvement of transient 
stability – Power oscillation damping – Functional requirements. Static Synchronous Series 
Compensator (SSSC) - GTO thyristor-controlled Series Cap acitor (GSC) – Thyristor Switched 
Series Capacitor (TSSC) and Thyristor Controlled Series Capacitor (TCSC). 
 
Unit V  
Combined Controllers 
Schematic and basic operating principles of Unified Power Flow Controller (UPFC) -Interline 
Power Flow Controller (IPFC)– Application. 
 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. <Understanding FACTS= N.G.Hingorani and L.Guygi, IEEE Press.Indian Edition is available:  
Standard Publications, 2001. 
2. <FACTS Controllers in Power Transmission and Distribution= Padiyar.K.R,  
New Age Int. Publishers, 2007 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. <Flexible ac transmission system (FACTS)= Edited by Yong Hue Song and Allan T Johns, 
Institution of Electrical Engineers, London.  
2. Thyristor-based FACTS Controllers for Electrical Trans mission Systems, by R.Mohan 
Mathur and Rajiv K.Varma, Wiley   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Professional Core Elective - I L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Design of PV Systems 
 
Course Objectives: 
 
 Understand the characteristics and modeling of PV cells and their interconnection. 
 Learn solar energy fundamentals, insolation estimation, and PV system sizing. 
 Explore MPPT techniques and converter integration for PV systems. 
 Gain knowledge on battery interfaces, charge control, and water pumping using PV. 
 Understand the principles and methods for interfacing PV systems with the grid. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
 Analyze PV cell behavior, efficiency, and protection methods in arrays. 
 Estimate solar energy on different surfaces and design basic PV systems. 
 Apply MPPT algorithms and DC-DC converter concepts to maximize PV output. 
 Design battery storage systems and apply PV for thermal and pumping needs. 
 Implement PV grid interface using modern control techniques and topologies. 
 
UNIT-I 
PV Cell 
Historical Perspective, PV cell characteristics and e quivalentcircuit, model of PV cell, cell 
efficiency, I-V & P-V Characteristics - effect of temper ature and irradiance, fill factor. Series and 
parallel connection of identical and non-identical cells , protecting cell in series and parallel, 
interconnecting modules, solar panels and PV System. 
 
UNIT-II 
Energy from Sun 
Insolation and irradiance, solar geometry, insolation and energy on horizontal plate, sunrise and 
sunset hour angles. Incident energy estimation:energy on a tilted flat plate, energy plots in octave, 
atmospheric effects, airmass, Sizing PV: sizing PV applicatio ns without batteries, Batteries, battery 
selection, PV system design.  
 
UNIT-III 
Maximum Power Point tracking 
MPPT concept – DC-DC converters, MPPT algorithms-Perturb & Observe, Incr emental 
Conductance - Casestudy of PV system design with MPPT algorithm. 
 
UNIT-IV 
PV Battery Interfaces 
Direct PV- Battery connection, charge controller, batt ery charger, batteries in series and parallel. 
Peltier Cooling: Peltier device, Peltier element, thermal aspects and Water Pumping: water pumping 
principle, hydraulic energy and power, total dynamic head, centrifugal pumps, reciprocating pump.  
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT-V 
PV Grid Interface 
Grid connection principles, PV to Grid Topologies, 3phased-q co ntrolled grid connection- AC to 
DC transformation, DC to AC transformation, complete 3 pha se grid connection. SVPWM-discrete 
and analog implementation, applicationof integrated magnetics.  
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Chenming, H. and White, R.M., Solar Cells from B to Advanced Systems, McGraw  
Hill Book Co, 1983.  
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Ruschenbach, HS, Solar Cell Array Design Hand Varmostrand, Reinhold, NY, 1980  
2. Proceedings of IEEE Photovoltaics Specialists Conferences, Solar Energy Journal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Professional Core Elective - II L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Electric Vehicles 
 
Course Objectives:  
The objectives of this course is to acquire knowledge on   
 basics concepts related to mechanics, kinetics and dynamics of electric vehicles.  
 technical characteristics and properties of batteries.  
 different ratings of motor and engine to design an electric vehicle.  
 various components of electric vehicle drive.  
 different configurations of drive train.   
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
 design propulsion system for an electric vehicle.  
 know technical characteristics and properties of batteries and also to design battery pack.  
 know the ratings and requirements of electrical machines.  
 apply the regenerative braking and sizing of motors.  
 configure and design the components of hybrid electric vehicles. 
 
UNIT I  
ELECTRIC VEHICLES  
Introduction, Components, vehicle mechanics – Roadway fundamentals, vehicle kinetics, Dynamics 
of vehiclemotion - Propulsion System Design. 
 
UNIT II  
BATTERY  
Basics – Types, Parameters – Capacity, Discharge rate, State of charge, state of Discharge, Depth of  
Discharge, Technical characteristics, Battery pack Design, Properties of Batteries. 
 
UNIT III  
DC & AC ELECTRICAL MACHINES    
Motor and Engine rating, Requirements, DC machines, Three p hase A.C machines, Induction 
machines,permanent magnet machines, switched reluctance machines.  
 
UNIT IV  
ELECTRIC VEHICLE DRIVE TRAIN   
Transmission configuration, Components – gears, differential, clutch, brakes regenerative braking,  
motor sizing.  
 
UNIT V  
HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLES   
Types – series, parallel and series, parallel configuration – Design – Drive train, sizing of 
components. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Text books: 
 
1. IqbalHussain, <Electric & Hybrid Vehicles –  Design Fundamentals=, Second Edition, CRC 
Press, 2011.  
2. James Larminie, <Electric Vehicle Technology Explained=, John Wiley & Sons, 2003.   
 
Reference Books:  
 
1. MehrdadEhsani, YiminGao, Ali Emadi , <Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric, and Fuel Cell 
Vehicles: Fundamentals=, CRC Press, 2010.   
2. SandeepDhameja, <Electric Vehicle Battery Systems=, Newnes, 2000  
3. 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/108103009/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Professional Core Elective - II L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Switched Mode Power Conversion 
Course Objectives: 
 
 Understand the fundamentals and operating modes of various S MPS topologies including 
Cuk converters. 
 Learn thyristor commutation methods and device selection for SMPS. 
 Explore transformer-isolated converter types and their configurations. 
 Study the design of magnetic components used in power converters. 
 Analyze switching regulator control and the benefits of soft-switching techniques. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
 Explain the principles and operating modes of Cuk and related converters. 
 Classify and compare various commutation techniques and selec t suitable devices for 
SMPS. 
 Analyze transformer-isolated converter topologies like flyback, forward, and push-pull. 
 Design magnetic components tailored for different converter applications. 
 Apply small-signal modeling and evaluate performance of soft-switched converters. 
 
UNIT-I 
Introduction to Switch Mode Power Converters - about Swit ch Mode Power Conversion, SMPS 
requirements. Cuk converters - and their principles of ope ration; continuous and discontinuous 
modes of operation. 
 
UNIT-II 
Thyristor Commutation Techniques - Review of Recent developm ents in power devices for switch 
mode power supplies. Selection of devices, Commutation: Load Co mmutation, Resonant Pulse 
Commutation, Complementary Commutation, Impulse Commutation, External Pulse Commutation. 
 
UNIT-III 
Transformer-Isolated Converters Single-switch and mul ti-switch transformer-isolated DC-DC 
converters. Flyback and forward converters; transformer i solated half-bridge, full - bridge 
converters. Push-pull converters. Voltage fed and current-fed converters. 
 
UNIT-IV 
Magnetic Component Design Magnetic core materials and performance; basic inductor and 
transformer design; practical magnetic design; design aspe cts to be considered for designing 
transformers for specific applications – flyback, push-pull converters. 
 
UNIT-V 
Switching Regulator Control, Soft-Switched Dc-Dc Power Conver ters Small-signal models for 
switching regulators. Performance analysis and design of closed-loop system under different control 
methods, and operating modes. Measurement of small signal transfer functions. Soft Switched DC-
DC Power Converters -Motivation. Hard-switching vs soft-switching. 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. N Mohan, T M Undeland and W P Robbins, "Power Electronics: Conv erters, Applications 
andDesign", Wiley, 3rd Edition, 2007  
2. Abraham Pressman, Keith Billings, Taylor Morey, "Switching P ower Supply Design", 
McGraw-Hill.3rd Edition, 2009 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. K. Kit Sum, Switch Mode Power Conversion: Basic Theory and Design 1st Edition, Kindle 
Edition,2017 
 
Web Links: 
1. 
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108108036 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Professional Core Elective - II L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Electrical Distribution Systems 
 
Course Objectives: 
 Understand the basic structure, load characteristics, and factors influencing distribution 
systems. 
 Learn substation placement and feeder design for efficient distribution networks. 
 Analyze voltage drop and power loss in various load conditions across distribution lines. 
 Explore protective devices and their coordination in distribution systems. 
 Study compensation techniques for power factor and voltage con trol in distribution 
networks. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to 
 Classify different loads and apply factors like load factor, loss factor, and coincidence factor 
in system planning. 
 Design optimal substation locations and feeder layouts for radial and loop systems. 
 Calculate voltage drops and power losses in distribution lines with various loading 
scenarios. 
 Select and coordinate protection devices to ensure safety an d reliability of the distribution 
system. 
 Implement capacitive compensation and voltage control m ethods for system efficiency and 
economy. 
 
UNIT – I 
General Concepts   
Introduction to distribution systems, Load modeling and characte ristics – Coincidence factor – 
Contributionfactor-loss factor – Relationship between the load factor and loss factor – Classification 
of loads (Residential, commercial, Agricultural and Industrial) and their characteristics.  
 
UNIT – II  
Substations & Distribution Feeders  
Location of substations: Rating of distribution substat ion – Service area with8n9primary feeders –  
Benefits and methods of optimal location of substations.  
Design Considerations of distribution feeders: Radial and loop types of primary feeders – Voltage 
levels – Feeder loading – Basic Design practice of the secondary distribution system.  
 
UNIT – III  
System Analysis  
Voltage drop and power –loss calculations: Derivation for voltage drop and power lo ss in lines – 
Uniformly distributed loads and non-uniformly distributed loads – Numerical problems - Three 
phase balanced primarylines.  
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT – IV 
Protective devices and Coordination  
Objectives of distribution system protection – Types of common faults and procedure for fault 
calculations fordistribution system – Protective devices: Principle of operation of fuses – Circuit 
reclosures – Line sectionalizes and circuit breakers, Coordination o f protective devices, General 
coordination procedures - Various types of coordinated operati on of protective devices - Residual 
Current Circuit Breaker  
 
UNIT – V  
Compensation for Power Factor Improvement and Voltage Control  
Capacitive compensation for power factor control – Different types of power capacitors – shunt and 
seriescapacitors – Effect of shunt capacitors (Fixed and switched) – Power factor correction – 
Capacitor allocation –Economic justification – Procedure to determine the best capacitor location. 
Equipment for voltage control –Effect of series capacitors – Effect of AVB/AVR – Line drop 
compensation – Numerical problems. 
 
Text Book:  
 
1. <Electric Power Distribution system, Engineering= –  by Turan Gonen, McGraw –hill Book 
Company. 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Electrical Distribution Systems by Dale R.Patrick and Stephen W.Fardo, CRC press  
2. Electric Power Distribution – by A.S. Pabla, Tata McGraw –hill Publishing company, 4th 
edition, 1997.  
3. Electrical Power Distribution Systems by V.Kamaraju, Right Publishers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Open Elective - III L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Battery Management Systems 
 
Course Objectives: 
 Understand the fundamentals of batteries, configurations, and charging processes. 
 Learn the functional requirements and architecture of a Battery Management System (BMS). 
 Explore methods for estimating battery state of charge  and health, along with balancing 
techniques. 
 Study modeling approaches for simulating batteries and electric vehicle performance. 
 Analyze design considerations for practical implementatio n of BMS in multi-battery 
systems. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to 
 Describe basic battery concepts, charging modes, and cell connections. 
 Explain BMS functionalities including sensing, protection, c ommunication, and estimation 
tasks. 
 Apply SOC and SOH estimation methods and design balancing circuits for lithium-ion cells. 
 Use circuit and physics-based models to simulate battery and EV performance. 
 Develop BMS designs considering practical parameters such a s load, range, and energy 
distribution. 
 
UNIT-I 
Introduction 
Introduction to Battery Management System, Cells & Batter ies, Nominal voltage and capacity, C 
rate, Energy and power, Cells connected in series, Cells  connected in parallel, Electrochemical and 
lithium-ion cells, Rechargeable cells, Charging and Dischar ging Process, Overcharge and 
Undercharge, Modes of Charging. 
 
 
UNIT-II 
Battery Management System Requirement 
Introduction and BMS functionality, Battery pack topology,  BMS Functionality, Voltage Sensing, 
Temperature Sensing, Current Sensing, BMS Functionality, Hig h-voltage contactor control, 
Isolation sensing, Thermal control, Protection, Communicat ion Interface, Range estimation, State-
of charge estimation, Cell total energy and cell total power. 
 
UNIT-III 
Battery State of Charge and State of Health Estimation, Cell Balancing 
Battery state of charge estimation (SOC), voltage-based m ethods to estimate SOC, Model-based 
state estimation, Battery Health Estimation, Lithium-i on aging: Negative electrode, Lithium-ion 
aging: Positive electrode, Cell Balancing, Causes of imbalance, Circuits for balancing. 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT-IV  
Modelling and Simulation 
Equivalent-circuit models (ECMs), Physics-based models (P BMs), Empirical modelling approach, 
Physics-based modelling approach, Simulating an electric vehic le, Vehicle range calculations, 
Simulating constant power and voltage, Simulating battery packs. 
 
UNIT-V 
Design of Battery BMS:  
Design principles of battery BMS, Effect of distance,  load, and force on battery life and BMS, 
energy balancing with multi-battery system. 
 
Text Books:  
 
1. Plett, Gregory L. Battery management systems, Volume I: Battery modeling. Artech House, 
2015.  
2. Plett, Gregory L. Battery management systems, Volume II : Equivalent-circuit methods. 
Artech House, 2015.  
 
References:  
1. Bergveld, H.J., Kruijt, W.S., Notten, P.H .L <Battery Management Systems -Design by 
Modelling= Philips Research Book Series 2002.  
2. Davide Andrea,= Battery Management Systems for Large Lithium -ion Battery Packs= 
Artech House, 2010  
3. Pop, Valer, et al. Battery management systems: Accurate  state-of-charge indication for 
battery-powered applications. Vol. 9. Springer Science & Business Media, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Open Elective - III L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Concepts of Smart Grid Technologies 
 
Course Objectives: 
 Understand the architecture, components, and need for smart  grids in modern power 
systems. 
 Explore communication technologies and measurement tools essential for smart grid 
operation. 
 Analyze performance through load flow, stability, and security studies tailored for smart 
grids. 
 Apply computational and optimization tools to improve smart g rid efficiency and ensure 
cyber security. 
 Study the integration of renewable energy sources, storage, and microgrids into smart grid 
infrastructure. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to 
 Explain the structure, benefits, and interoperability standards of smart grid systems. 
 Identify and apply appropriate communication and metering tec hnologies for smart grid 
implementation. 
 Perform performance and security analyses for smart grid operations using advanced tools. 
 Utilize computational techniques for optimization and address s ecurity challenges in the 
smart grid. 
 Evaluate integration strategies for renewable energy, s torage systems, and demand response 
mechanisms. 
 
UNIT I 
Smart Grid Architecture  
Challenges in power grid, Advantages of building integrated and distributed power systems concept 
of smart grid, need for smart grid, smart grid components and their limitations, grid vision based on 
the intelligent architecture, Whole sale energy market in  smart grid, Stake holders9 roles and 
function, Approach to smart grid interoperability standards.  
 
UNIT II 
Communications and Measurements  
Latest wired and wireless technologies, Characteristics of smart grid communications technology 
and  
communication techniques, Switching techniques and communicatio n channels,Wide area 
monitoring systems, Phasor measurements units, Key compone nts of smart metering, 
Communication infrastructure and protocols for smart meter ing, Advanced metering infrastructure, 
Multi agent systems for smart grid implementation  
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT III 
Performance Analysis Tools  
Load flow studies for smart grid, extended formulations an d algorithms, Smart Grid - Security 
assessment, Contingency studies, Voltage stabilityand Energy management.  
 
UNIT IV 
Computational Tools and Security  
Introduction to computational tools, Optimization techniques and applications to smart grid, 
Evolutionarycomputation techniques and computational challenges , Network security: Encryption 
and decryption, cyber-attacks, Authentication and cyber security standards  
 
UNIT V 
Renewable Energy and Storage  
Benefits of renewable generation, Importance of micro gr id, Demand response issues, PHEV 
technology, Energy storage technologies, Grid integration issues of renewable energy sources. 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. James Momoh, <Smart Grid –  fundamentals of design and analysis=, John Wiley and Sons,  
2012  
2. Stuart Borlase, <Smart Grids, Infrastructure, Technology and Solutions=, CRC press, 2013   
3. Clark W. Gellings, <The Smart Grid - Enabling energy efficiency and demand response=, 
CRC press, 2009  
 
Reference Books:  
 
1. Janaka Ekanayake, <Smart Grid-Technology and Applications=, John Wiley and Sons, 2012  
2. Fereidoon P.Sioshansi, <Smart grid- integrating renewable, distributed and efficient energy=, 
Elsevier, 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Open Elective - III L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Introduction to Artificial Intelligence  
Course Description 
This course provides engineering students with a comprehensive introduction to the field of 
Artificial Intelligence (AI). Students will explore the fundamental concepts, methodologies, and 
applications of AI, including problem-solving techniques, knowledge representation, reasoning 
under uncertainty, and ethical considerations. The course combines theoretical foundations with 
practical implementations, enabling students to understand both the capabilities and limitations of 
modern AI systems while developing critical thinking about the societal implications of AI 
technologies. 
Teaching Objectives 
 Introduce students to the fundamental concepts, history, and evolution of artificial intelligence 
 Develop students' understanding of various AI problem-solving approaches and search algorithms 
 Enable students to represent knowledge and perform reasoning in AI systems 
 Familiarize students with probabilistic reasoning and decision-making under uncertainty 
 Foster critical thinking about ethical and societal implications of AI technologies 
 Provide hands-on experience implementing basic AI algorithms and applications 
Course Outcomes 
Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to: 
 Explain the fundamental concepts, history, and approaches in artificial intelligence and identify 
appropriate AI techniques for solving different types of problems (Understand/Apply) 
 Implement and evaluate various search algorithms to solve problems in the AI domain 
(Apply/Analyze) 
 Design knowledge representation schemes and reasoning mechanisms for different AI applications 
(Create/Evaluate) 
 Apply probabilistic reasoning methods and decision theory to address uncertainty in AI systems 
(Apply/Analyze) 
 Assess the ethical and societal implications of AI systems and develop responsible AI solutions 
that consider fairness, privacy, and societal impact (Evaluate/Create) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Unit 1: Foundations of AI 
Unit Description 
This unit introduces students to the core concepts, history, and evolution of artificial intelligence. Students 
will explore different types of AI, fundamental problem-solving approaches, and the wide range of AI 
applications across various domains. The unit also covers the basic structure of intelligent agents and their 
interactions with environments. 
Syllabus Topics 
1. Introduction to AI 
o Definitions and scope of artificial intelligence 
o Historical development and milestones in AI research 
o The AI winter periods and recent resurgence 
o Strong vs. weak AI concepts 
2. Types of AI Systems 
o Narrow (weak) vs. general (strong) AI 
o Reactive machines vs. theory of mind systems 
o Self-aware systems and AI consciousness debates 
o Current state-of-the-art AI capabilities 
3. Problem-Solving Approaches in AI 
o State space representation 
o Production systems 
o Problem reduction 
o Means-ends analysis 
4. Agent-Based View of AI 
o Simple reflex agents 
o Model-based reflex agents 
o Goal-based agents 
o Utility-based agents 
o Learning agents 
5. Application Domains of AI 
o Computer vision and image recognition 
o Natural language processing 
o Robotics and automation 
o Healthcare applications 
o Financial services applications 
o Autonomous vehicles 
Examples/Applications/Case Studies 
 Case Study: The evolution of chess-playing AI from Deep Blue to AlphaZero 
 Application Example: Virtual assistants (Siri, Alexa, Google Assistant) 
 Case Study: IBM Watson's journey from Jeopardy! champion to healthcare applications 
 Application Example: Facial recognition systems in security and consumer technology 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Exercise/Project Problems 
1. Research and create a timeline of significant AI milestones from 1950 to present 
2. Design a simple reflex agent for a specified environment (e.g., a vacuum cleaner agent) 
3. Compare and contrast narrow AI applications in two different domains 
4. Analyze a real-world problem and determine appropriate AI approaches 
Tool Studies 
 Introduction to Python programming for AI 
 Overview of AI development frameworks (TensorFlow, PyTorch, scikit-learn) 
 Jupyter notebooks for interactive AI experimentation 
 GitHub repositories with AI examples and implementations 
Learning Outcomes 
After completing this unit, students will be able to: 
 Trace the historical development of AI and identify key milestones (Remember) 
 Distinguish between different types of AI systems and their capabilities (Understand) 
 Represent problems in forms suitable for AI solution approaches (Apply) 
 Classify intelligent agents based on their architecture and capabilities (Analyze) 
 Identify appropriate AI applications for different problem domains (Analyze) 
References/E-Resources 
 Russell, S., & Norvig, P. (2021). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (4th ed.). Pearson. 
Chapters 1-2. 
http://aima.cs.berkeley.edu/ 
 Stanford University's "AI Index Annual Report" https://aiindex.stanford.edu/report/ 
 MIT OpenCourseWare: Introduction to AI https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-
computer-science/6-034-artificial-intelligence-fall-2010/ 
Unit 2: Search Algorithms 
Unit Description 
This unit focuses on search algorithms as fundamental problem-solving techniques in AI. Students will 
learn how to formulate problems as search problems, implement uninformed and informed search 
strategies, and apply these techniques to various domains including adversarial scenarios and game 
playing. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Syllabus Topics 
1. Problem Formulation 
o State space representation 
o Initial and goal states 
o Actions and transition models 
o Path cost and step cost functions 
o Problem types and complexity analysis 
2. Uninformed Search Strategies 
o Breadth-first search 
o Depth-first search 
o Depth-limited search 
o Iterative deepening search 
o Bidirectional search 
o Uniform cost search 
o Time and space complexity analysis 
3. Informed Search Strategies 
o Best-first search 
o Greedy best-first search 
o A* search algorithm 
o Heuristic functions: properties and design 
o Admissibility and consistency 
o Local search algorithms and optimization 
4. Constraint Satisfaction Problems 
o Problem formulation as CSP 
o Constraint propagation 
o Backtracking search 
o Local search for CSPs 
o Applications of CSPs 
5. Adversarial Search and Game Playing 
o Minimax algorithm 
o Alpha-beta pruning 
o Stochastic games 
o Partially observable games 
o Monte Carlo tree search 
o Game theory concepts 
Examples/Applications/Case Studies 
 Case Study: Route finding applications like Google Maps 
 Application Example: Puzzle solving (8-puzzle, Rubik's cube) 
 Case Study: AlphaGo's strategies and their implications 
 Application Example: Scheduling and resource allocation problems 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Exercise/Project Problems 
1. Implement breadth-first and depth-first search algorithms for the 8-puzzle problem 
2. Design and implement an A* search for a pathfinding problem with different heuristics 
3. Develop a constraint satisfaction solver for Sudoku puzzles 
4. Create a simple game AI using minimax algorithm with alpha-beta pruning 
Tool Studies 
 Python implementation of search algorithms 
 Visualization tools for search algorithms (e.g., pathfinding visualizers) 
 Game AI frameworks and libraries 
 NetworkX library for graph representation and algorithms 
Learning Outcomes 
After completing this unit, students will be able to: 
 Formulate problems as state space search problems (Apply) 
 Implement and compare uninformed search strategies (Apply) 
 Design effective heuristic functions for informed search algorithms (Create) 
 Apply constraint satisfaction techniques to appropriate problem domains (Apply) 
 Evaluate and optimize adversarial search algorithms for games (Evaluate) 
References/E-Resources 
 Russell, S., & Norvig, P. (2021). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (4th ed.). Pearson. 
Chapters 3-5. 
http://aima.cs.berkeley.edu/ 
 Berkeley AI Materials: Search http://ai.berkeley.edu/search.html 
 Visualization of Search Algorithms: https://qiao.github.io/PathFinding.js/visual/ 
 Interactive Game Theory Tutorials: https://gametheory101.com/courses/ 
Unit 3: Knowledge Representation 
Unit Description 
This unit explores methods for representing and organizing knowledge in AI systems. Students will learn 
about various knowledge representation schemes including logic-based approaches, semantic networks, 
frames, and ontologies. The unit also covers reasoning mechanisms that operate on these knowledge 
representations to derive new information and make inferences. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Syllabus Topics 
1. Logic and Inference 
o Propositional logic: syntax and semantics 
o First-order logic: quantifiers, variables, and predicates 
o Inference rules: modus ponens, resolution 
o Forward and backward chaining 
o Unification and substitution 
2. Semantic Networks 
o Network structure and node types 
o Inheritance hierarchies 
o Spreading activation 
o Semantic relationships 
o Implementation approaches 
3. Frames and Scripts 
o Frame structure and slots 
o Default values and demons 
o Inheritance in frame systems 
o Scripts for representing procedural knowledge 
o Event and situation representation 
4. Ontologies and Knowledge Graphs 
o Ontology components and design principles 
o Web Ontology Language (OWL) 
o Knowledge graph construction 
o Entity-relationship modeling 
o Linked data concepts 
5. Rule-Based Systems 
o Production rules 
o Rule-based expert systems 
o Conflict resolution strategies 
o Explanation facilities 
o Certainty factors and confidence 
Examples/Applications/Case Studies 
 Case Study: WordNet as a lexical semantic network 
 Application Example: DBpedia and Wikidata as knowledge graphs 
 Case Study: Google's Knowledge Graph and its applications in search 
 Application Example: MYCIN and DENDRAL as early expert systems 
Exercise/Project Problems 
1. Implement a small propositional logic reasoning system 
2. Design a semantic network for a specific domain (e.g., university courses) 
3. Create a frame-based representation for a common object or concept 
4. Develop a simple rule-based expert system for a diagnostic task 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Tool Studies 
 Protégé ontology editor 
 SWI-Prolog for logic programming 
 RDF and OWL tools for semantic web applications 
 Python libraries for knowledge representation (NLTK, NetworkX) 
Learning Outcomes 
After completing this unit, students will be able to: 
 Apply logical representation and reasoning to knowledge-based problems (Apply) 
 Design semantic networks for organizing domain knowledge (Create) 
 Construct frame-based representations for objects and concepts (Create) 
 Develop ontologies and knowledge graphs for information organization (Create) 
 Implement rule-based systems for inference tasks (Apply) 
References/E-Resources 
 Russell, S., & Norvig, P. (2021). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (4th ed.). Pearson. 
Chapters 7-10. 
http://aima.cs.berkeley.edu/ 
 Stanford University: Introduction to Knowledge Representation 
https://web.stanford.edu/class/cs227/ 
 ProtégéOntology Editor Tutorialshttps://protegewiki.stanford.edu/wiki/Protege5Tutorials 
 W3C Semantic Web Standards https://www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/ 
Unit 4: Reasoning Under Uncertainty 
Unit Description 
This unit addresses methods for handling uncertainty in AI systems. Students will review probability 
theory fundamentals and learn about probabilistic reasoning techniques including Bayesian networks and 
Markov models. The unit also covers decision theory and its applications to AI decision-making under 
uncertainty. 
Syllabus Topics 
1. Probability Theory Review 
o Random variables and probability distributions 
o Joint, conditional, and marginal probabilities 
o Bayes' theorem and its applications 
o Independence and conditional independence 
o Expectation and variance 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
2. Bayesian Networks 
o Graphical representation of probability distributions 
o Conditional independence in Bayesian networks 
o d-separation and Markov blanket 
o Inference in Bayesian networks 
o Parameter learning from data 
o Structure learning algorithms 
3. Markov Models 
o Markov chains and transition matrices 
o Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) 
o Viterbi algorithm 
o Forward-backward algorithm 
o Baum-Welch algorithm 
o Applications in temporal reasoning 
4. Decision Theory 
o Utility theory and utility functions 
o Decision networks (influence diagrams) 
o Value of information 
o Risk assessment and management 
o Multi-attribute utility theory 
5. Probabilistic Reasoning Applications 
o Medical diagnosis systems 
o Spam filtering and text classification 
o Financial risk assessment 
o Speech recognition 
o Robot localization and mapping 
Examples/Applications/Case Studies 
 Case Study: Naive Bayes classifiers for text categorization 
 Application Example: Medical diagnosis expert systems 
 Case Study: Speech recognition using Hidden Markov Models 
 Application Example: Recommender systems using probabilistic models 
Exercise/Project Problems 
1. Implement a Naive Bayes classifier for spam detection 
2. Build a simple Bayesian network for a diagnostic problem 
3. Create a Hidden Markov Model for part-of-speech tagging 
4. Develop a decision network for a personal finance recommendation system 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Tool Studies 
 Python libraries for probabilistic modeling (PyMC3, PyStan) 
 Bayesian network tools (BayesiaLab, Hugin) 
 Probabilistic programming languages (Stan, Pyro) 
 WEKA machine learning toolkit for classification 
Learning Outcomes 
After completing this unit, students will be able to: 
 Apply Bayesian probability principles to reasoning problems (Apply) 
 Construct Bayesian networks for probabilistic modeling (Create) 
 Implement Markov models for sequential data analysis (Apply) 
 Develop decision-theoretic approaches for problems under uncertainty (Create) 
 Evaluate the effectiveness of probabilistic reasoning techniques (Evaluate) 
References/E-Resources 
 Russell, S., & Norvig, P. (2021). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (4th ed.). Pearson. 
Chapters 12-16. 
http://aima.cs.berkeley.edu/ 
 Koller, D., & Friedman, N. (2009). Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques. 
MIT Press. https://pgm.stanford.edu/ 
 Carnegie Mellon University: Probabilistic Graphical Models 
https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~epxing/Class/10708/ 
 Tutorials on Bayesian Networks https://www.bayesserver.com/docs/ 
Unit 5: Ethical and Societal Implications 
Unit Description 
This unit explores the ethical and societal dimensions of artificial intelligence. Students will examine 
issues of bias and fairness in AI systems, privacy concerns, the impact of automation on employment, and 
approaches to AI governance and regulation. The unit emphasizes responsible AI development practices 
and frameworks for assessing the broader implications of AI technologies. 
Syllabus Topics 
1. AI Bias and Fairness 
o Sources of bias in AI systems 
o Fairness metrics and definitions 
o Bias detection and mitigation methods 
o Representation and inclusion in AI development 
o Case studies of algorithmic bias 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
2. Privacy and AI 
o Data collection and consent 
o Anonymization and de-identification techniques 
o Privacy-preserving AI methods 
o Differential privacy 
o Surveillance and privacy implications 
 
3. Automation and Employment 
o Labor market impacts of AI automation 
o Skill-biased technological change 
o Future of work scenarios 
o Economic policy responses 
o Education and retraining approaches 
4. AI Governance and Regulation 
o Regulatory frameworks for AI 
o Standards and certifications 
o Self-regulation and industry initiatives 
o International cooperation on AI governance 
o Risk assessment frameworks 
5. Responsible AI Development 
o AI ethics principles 
o Explainable AI methods 
o Human-in-the-loop systems 
o Value alignment problem 
o Long-term AI safety considerations 
Examples/Applications/Case Studies 
 Case Study: COMPAS recidivism prediction and racial bias 
 Application Example: Privacy-preserving federated learning 
 Case Study: Automation in manufacturing and service industries 
 Application Example: Explainable AI in healthcare decision-making 
Exercise/Project Problems 
1. Analyze a dataset for potential sources of bias and propose mitigation strategies 
2. Design a privacy-preserving AI system for a sensitive application 
3. Develop an impact assessment framework for an AI deployment scenario 
4. Create an explainable AI approach for a black-box model 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Tool Studies 
 Fairness-aware machine learning libraries (AI Fairness 360, Fairlearn) 
 Explainable AI tools (LIME, SHAP, InterpretML) 
 Privacy-preserving AI frameworks (PySyft, TensorFlow Privacy) 
 Ethical assessment frameworks and checklists 
References/E-Resources 
 Russell, S., & Norvig, P. (2021). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (4th ed.). Pearson. 
Chapter 27. 
http://aima.cs.berkeley.edu/ 
 The Ethics of Artificial Intelligence. Bostrom, N., & Yudkowsky, E. (2014). 
https://nickbostrom.com/ethics/artificial-intelligence.pdf 
 AI Ethics Guidelines Global Inventory by Algorithm Watch https://inventory.algorithmwatch.org/ 
 IEEE Ethics in Action https://ethicsinaction.ieee.org/ 
 Partnership on AI https://www.partnershiponai.org/resources/ 
Textbooks and References 
Primary Textbooks 
1. Russell, S., & Norvig, P. (2021). Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (4th ed.). Pearson. 
2. Luger, G. F. (2020). Artificial Intelligence: Structures and Strategies for Complex Problem 
Solving (6th ed.). Pearson. 
Additional References 
1. Poole, D. L., & Mackworth, A. K. (2017). Artificial Intelligence: Foundations of Computational 
Agents (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press. 
2. Nilsson, N. J. (2009). The Quest for Artificial Intelligence: A History of Ideas and Achievements. 
Cambridge University Press. 
3. Koller, D., & Friedman, N. (2009). Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques. 
MIT Press. 
4. Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., & Courville, A. (2016). Deep Learning. MIT Press. 
5. Kaplan, J. (2016). Artificial Intelligence: What Everyone Needs to Know. Oxford University Press. 
6. O'Neil, C. (2016). Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and 
Threatens Democracy. Crown. 
7. Tegmark, M. (2017). Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artificial Intelligence. Knopf. 
8. Ertel, W. (2018). Introduction to Artificial Intelligence (2nd ed.). Springer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Open Elective - IV L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Power Quality and Custom Power Devices  
 
Course Objectives: 
The objectives of this course is to acquire knowledge on  
 
 significance of power quality and power quality parameters.  
 types of transient over voltages and protection of transient voltages.  
 harmonics, their effects, harmonic indices and harmonic minimization techniques.  
 importance of power devices and their applications.  
 different compensation techniques to minimize power quality disturbances. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to 
 identify the issues related to power quality in power systems.  
 address the problems of transient and long duration voltage variations in power systems.  
 analyze the effects of harmonics and study of different mitigation techniques.  
 identify the importance of custom power devices and their applications.  
 acquire knowledge on different compensation techniques to min imize power quality 
disturbances. 
 
UNIT I 
Introduction to Power Quality 
Overview of power quality – Concern about the power quality – General classes of power quality 
and voltage quality problems – Transients – Long –duration voltage variations – Short –duration  
voltage variations – Voltage unbalance – Waveform distortion – Voltage fluctuation – Power 
frequency variations- Power quality terms –Voltage sags, Voltage swells, harmonics interruptions, 
voltage flicker and voltage spikes – Sources of voltage sag, swell and interruptions – Nonlinear 
loads.  
 
UNIT II 
Transient and Long Duration Voltage Variations 
Source of transient over voltages – Principles of over voltage protection – Devices for over voltage 
protection – Utility capacitor switching transients.  
Principles of regulating the voltage – Device for voltage regulation – Utility voltage regulator 
application – Capacitor for voltage regulation – End–user capacitor application – Regulating utility 
voltage with distributedresources. 
 
UNIT III 
Harmonic distortion and solutions  
Voltage vs. Current Distortion, Harmonics vs. Transients -  Power System Quantities under Non-
sinusoidal Conditions, Harmonic Indices, Sources of harm onics, Locating Sources of Harmonics, 
System Response Characteristics, Effects of Harmonic D istortion, Inter harmonics, Harmonic 
Solutions Harmonic Distortion Evaluation, Devices for Cont rolling Harmonic Distortion, Harmonic 
Filter Design, Standards on Harmonics  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT IV 
Custom Power Devices  
Custom power and custom power devices, voltage source inverters, reactive power  
and harmonic compensation devices, compensation of voltage interruptions and current 
interruptions, static series and shunt compensators, compe nsation in distribution systems, 
interaction with distribution equipment, installation considerations.  
 
UNIT V 
Application of custom power devices in power systems  
Static and hybrid Source Transfer Switches, Solid state c urrent limiter - Solid state breaker. P-Q 
theory – Control of P and Q, Dynamic Voltage Restorer (DVR): Operatio n and control – Interline 
Power Flow Controller (IPFC): Operation and control of Uni fied Power Quality Conditioner 
(UPQC); Generalized power quality conditioner. 
 
Text Books:  
 
1. Electrical Power Systems Quality, Dugan R C, McGranaghan M  F, Santoso S, and Beaty H 
W,Second Edition, McGraw-Hill, 2002.  
2. Understanding Power Quality Problems: Voltage Sags and Interrupti ons, Bollen M H J, 
First  
Edition, IEEE Press; 2000.  
3. Power Quality Enhancement Using Custom Power Devices – Power Electronics and Power  
Systems, Gerard Ledwich, ArindamGhosh, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002.  
4. Custom Power Devices - An Introduction, Arindam Ghosh and Ger ard Ledwich, Springer, 
2002. 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Power Quality Primer, Kennedy B W, First Edition, McGraw-Hill, 2000.  
2. Power System Harmonics, Arrillaga J and Watson N R, Second Edition, John Wiley & 
Sons, 2003.  
3. Electric Power Quality control Techniques, W. E. Kazibwe an d M. H. Sendaula, Van 
Nostrad 
Reinhold, New York.  
4. Power Quality c.shankaran, CRC Press, 2001  
5. Harmonics and Power Systems –Franciso C.DE LA Rosa-CRC Press (Taylor & Francis).  
6. Power Quality in Power systems and Electrical Machines-Ewal dF.fuchs, Mohammad A.S. 
MasoumElsevier  
7. Power Quality, C. Shankaran, CRC Press, 2001  
8. Instantaneous Power Theory and Application to Power Condit ioning, H. Akagiet.al., IEEE 
Press, 2007.  
9. A Review of Compensating Type Custom Power Devices for Power Quality Improvement, 
Yash Pal et.al., Joint International Conference on Power System Technology and IEEE 
Power India Conference, 2008. POWERCON 2008.  
10. Guidebook on Custom Power Devices, Technical Report, Published by EPRI, Nov 2000 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Open Elective - IV L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Programmable Logic Controllers 
 
 
Course Objectives:  
The objectives of this course is to acquire knowledge to   
 have knowledge on PLC.  
 acquire knowledge on programming of PLC.  
 understand different PLC registers and their description.  
 have knowledge on data handling functions of PLC.  
 know how to handle analog signals and converting of A/D in PLC. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to:  
 know the PLCs and their I/O modules.  
 develop control algorithms to PLC using ladder logic.  
 manage PLC registers for effective utilization in different applications.  
 design PID controller with PLC.  
 handle analog signal and converting of A/D in PLC 
 
 
Unit I 
Introduction   
PLC Basics: PLC system, I/O modules and interfacing, CPU pr ocessor, programming equipment, 
programming formats, construction of PLC ladder diagrams, devices connected to I/O modules. 
 
Unit II 
PLC Programming 
Input instructions, outputs, operational procedures, programming examples using contacts  
and coils. Digital logic gates, programming in the Boolean algebra system, conversion examples. 
Ladder diagrams and sequence listings, ladder diagram construction. 
 
Unit III  
Programmable Timers and Counters 
Timer instructions – On delay time instruction – Off delay timer instruction – Retentive timer – 
Counter instructions – Up counter – Down counter – Cascading counters – Incremental encoder – 
Counter applications – Combining counter and timer functions. 
 
Unit IV 
Program Control Instructions 
Master control reset instruction – Jump instructions and sub routines – Immediate input and output 
instructions. Data manipulation – Data transfer operation – Data compare instruction – Data 
manipulation programs –Numerical data I/O interfaces – Math instructions – Addition, subtraction, 
multiplication. 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Unit V  
Applications   
Control of water level indicator – Alarm monitor - Conveyor motor control – Parking garage – 
Ladder diagram for process control – PID controller. 
 
Text Books:  
 
1. Programmable logic controllers by Frank D.Petruzella- McGraw Hill – 3rd Edition.  
2. Programmable Logic Controllers – Principle and Applications by John W. Webb and 
Ronald A. Reiss, Fifth Edition, PHI 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Programmable Logic Controllers – Programming Method and Applications by JR. 
Hackworth and F.D Hackworth Jr. – Pearson, 2004.  
2. Introduction to Programmable Logic Controllers- Gary Dunning-C engageLearning. 
Programmable Logic Controllers –W.Bolton-Elsevier publisher 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Open Elective - IV L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Quantum Computing 
Course 1: Introduction to Quantum Computing 
1. Classical Computing Foundations 
o Binary representation and Boolean logic 
o Complexity theory and computational limits 
o Linear algebrareview for quantum computing 
o Reversible computing 
2. Quantum Mechanics Fundamentals 
o Wave-particle duality and superposition 
o Measurement and uncertainty principles 
o Quantum states and probability amplitudes 
o Hilbert spaces and Dirac notation 
3. Quantum Bits and Gates 
o Qubit representation and Bloch sphere 
o Single-qubit gates (X, Y, Z, H, S, T) 
o Multi-qubit gates and entanglement 
o Universal gate sets 
4. Quantum Circuits 
o Circuit notation and composition 
o Basic circuit identities and simplifications 
o Quantum circuit simulation 
o Introduction to quantum algorithms 
5. Quantum Computing Platforms 
o Superconducting qubits 
o Trapped ions 
o Photonic quantum computing 
o Current quantum hardware landscape 
Course 2: Quantum Algorithms I 
1. Quantum Algorithm Fundamentals 
o Quantum parallelism and interference 
o Quantum algorithm design principles 
o Quantum query model 
o Probability amplification techniques 
2. Quantum Oracles and Black Box Problems 
o Classical vs. quantum oracles 
o Bernstein-Vazirani algorithm 
o Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm 
o Simon's algorithm 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
3. Quantum Fourier Transform 
o Discrete Fourier transform review 
o Quantum Fourier transform construction 
o QFT circuit implementation 
o Applications in quantum algorithms 
4. Period Finding and Shor's Algorithm 
o Number theory background 
o Quantum phase estimation 
o Period finding algorithm 
o Shor's factoring algorithm 
5. Quantum Search 
o Unstructured search problems 
o Grover's algorithm fundamentals 
o Amplitude amplification 
o Applications and limitations 
Course 3: Quantum Information Theory 
1. Classical Information Theory Review 
o Entropy and information content 
o Data compression 
o Channel capacity 
o Error correction fundamentals 
2. Quantum States and Measurements 
o Density matrix formalism 
o POVM measurements 
o Quantum state discrimination 
o Quantum state tomography 
3. Quantum Entanglement 
o Bell states and entanglement measures 
o Bell's inequalities and non-locality 
o Entanglement as a resource 
o Applications in quantum protocols 
4. Quantum Channels and Operations 
o Quantum operations and Kraus representation 
o Completely positive maps 
o Quantum channel capacity 
o Quantum noise models 
5. Quantum Shannon Theory 
o Von Neumann entropy 
o Holevo bound 
o Quantum data compression 
o Quantum channel capacity theorems 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Course 4: Quantum Error Correction 
1. Quantum Noise and Decoherence 
o Sources of quantum errors 
o Error models and characterization 
o Decoherence mechanisms 
o Quantum error mitigation techniques 
2. Classical Error Correction Review 
o Linear codes 
o Parity check matrices 
o Syndrome decoding 
o Classical code families 
3. Quantum Error Correction Fundamentals 
o No-cloning theorem challenges 
o Quantum error correction criteria 
o Error detection vs. correction 
o Stabilizer formalism 
4. Quantum Error Correcting Codes 
o Three-qubit code 
o Shor's nine-qubit code 
o Steane code 
o Surface codes introduction 
5. Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computing 
o Fault-tolerance principles 
o Threshold theorem 
o Logical operations on encoded qubits 
o Magic state distillation 
Course 5: Quantum Algorithms II and Applications 
1. Advanced Quantum Search Techniques 
o Quantum walks 
o Quantum minimum finding 
o Amplitude amplification extensions 
o NAND tree evaluation 
2. Quantum Machine Learning 
o Quantum data encoding 
o Quantum neural networks 
o HHL algorithm for linear systems 
o Quantum support vector machines 
3. Quantum Simulation 
o Hamiltonian simulation 
o Trotter-Suzuki formulas 
o Quantum chemistry applications 
o Materials science applications 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
4. Quantum Optimization 
o Quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA) 
o Quantum adiabatic algorithm 
o Quantum annealing 
o Variational quantum algorithms 
5. Emerging Quantum Applications 
o Quantum finance 
o Quantum networking and cryptography 
o Quantum sensing and metrology 
o Quantum computational advantage demonstrations 
Course 6: Quantum Software Development and Programming 
1. Quantum Programming Fundamentals 
o Classical vs. quantum programming models 
o Quantum algorithm implementation strategies 
o Quantum-classical hybrid computing 
o Cloud-based quantum computing services 
2. Quantum Programming Languages 
o Qiskit ecosystem 
o Cirq and other Google frameworks 
o Q# and Microsoft quantum development kit 
o PyQuil and other frameworks 
3. Quantum Circuit Optimization 
o Circuit depth reduction 
o Gate decomposition 
o Transpilation strategies 
o Hardware-specific optimizations 
4. Quantum Software Testing and Verification 
o Quantum program verification 
o Testing strategies for quantum software 
o Benchmarking quantum programs 
o Performance analysis techniques 
5. Quantum Software Project 
o Project planning and requirements 
o Algorithm implementation 
o Testing and optimization 
o Results analysis and presentation 
This minor program provides comprehensive coverage of quantum computing fundamentals, algorithms, 
information theory, error correction, applications, and software development, giving undergraduate 
students a strong foundation in this emerging field. 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Skill Enhancement Course L T P C 
0 0 4 2 
         Power Systems Simulation Lab 
 
Course Objectives:   
 To impart the practical knowledge of functioning of various power system components and  
determination of various parameters and simulation of lo ad flows, transient stability, LFC 
and Economic dispatch.  
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to:  
 Estimate the sequence impedances of 3-phase Transformer and Alternators  
 Evaluate the performance of transmission lines  
 Analyse and simulate power flow methods in power systems  
 Analyse and simulate the performance of PI controller for load frequency control.  
 Analyse and simulate stability studies of power systems 
 
Any of 5 experiments are to be conducted from each section: 
 
Section I: Power Systems Lab:  
 
1. Estimation of sequence impedances of 3-phase Transformer   
2. Estimation of sequence impedances of 3-phase Alternator by Fault Analysis  
3. Estimation of sequence impedances of 3-phase Alternator by Direct method  
4. Estimation of ABCD parameters on transmission line model  
5. Performance of long transmission line without compensation  
6. Performance of long transmission line with shunt compensation  
7. Analyze the Ferranti effect on long transmission line  
 
Section II: Simulation Lab 
 
8.Determination of Ybus using direct inspection method  
9.Load flow solution of a power system network using Gauss-Seidel method  
10. Load flow solution of a power system network using Newton Raphson method.  
11. Formation of Zbus by building algorithm.  
12. Economic load dispatch with & without losses  
13. Load frequency control of a two area Power System without & with PI controller  
14. Transient Stability analysis of single machine connected to an infinite bus (SMIB) using equal  
area criterion.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Audit Course L T P C 
2 0 0 0 
Constitution of India 
 
Course Objectives 
 Understand the historical development and philosophy behind the Indian Constitution. 
 Gain insights into the structure, functioning, and powers of Union and State Governments. 
 Comprehend the scope of fundamental rights, duties, and directive principles. 
 Recognize the functioning of constitutional bodies and their roles in governance. 
 Appreciate the significance of local self-governance and recent constitutional amendments. 
Unit I: Constitutional Foundation and Historical Background 
 
Constitutional history and the making of the Indian Const itution, Role of the Constituent Assembly, 
Salient features of the Indian Constitution, Significan ce of the Preamble, Process of constitutional 
amendments (Article 368) 
 
Unit II:  
Fundamental Rights, Duties, and Directive Principles 
Citizenship provisions under the Constitution, Fundamental Rights (Articles 12–35), Directive Principles 
of State Policy (Articles 36–51), Fundamental Duties (Article 51A) 
Unit III:  
Union Government 
President and Vice President: election, powers, and remova l, Prime Minister and Council of Ministers, 
Structure and functions of Parliament, Judiciary: Structure and powers of the Supreme Court, Centre-State 
relations: legislative, administrative, and financial, Emergency provisions (Articles 352, 356, 360) 
Unit IV:  
State Government and Local Governance 
Governor: Appointment, powers, and functions, State Legislature and Chief Minister, Role of High 
Courts, Rural and Urban Local Governments, 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendment Acts (Panchayati 
Raj and Municipalities) 
Unit V:  
Constitutional and Statutory Bodies 
Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG), Election Commissio n of India, Finance Commission, Attorney 
General and Advocate General, Union and State Public Service Commissions (UPSC & SPSC), Tribunals 
and National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Textbooks:  
1. J.C.Johari,IndianGovernmentandPolitics,VishalPublicati ons,Delhi,2009.Machine Learning: A 
Probabilistic Perspective, Kevin P. Murphy, 2012,MIT Press (Unit-2&3)  
2. M. V. Pylee, Introduction to the Constitution of India, 5th Ed., Vikas Publishing House, Mumbai, 2007. 
 
Reference Books:  
1. D.D. Basu, Introduction to the Indian Constitution, 21st Ed., Lexis Nexis, Gurgaon, India, 2011. 2. 
Subhas C. Kashyap, Our Constitution, 2nd Ed., National Book Trust India, New Delhi, 2013 
 
 e-Resources: 
 1. 
https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc20_lw02/preview Evaluation of Industry Internship 
 
Course Outcomes (COs) 
After completion of the course, the student will be able to 
 Explain the evolution and salient features of the Indian Constitution. 
 Describe the structure of the Indian Government and its functioning at the Union and State levels. 
 Analyze the significance of the Preamble, Fundamental Rights, and Duties. 
 Evaluate the role of statutory and constitutional bodies in democratic governance. 
 Interpret the importance of decentralization through Panchayati Raj and urban local bodies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV B.TECH I SEMESTER Internship  L T P C 
0 0 0 2 
Evaluation of IndustryInternship 
(done during III-II Summer Vacation – 8 Weeks) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
B.Tech. IV Year-II Semester 
 
S.No Category Title L T P C 
1 Internship & 
Project Work 
Full Semester Internship & Project Work 0 0 24 12 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
  
Honors Engineering Courses offered to EEE Branch students 
Need to Acquire 18 credits 
 
S.No. Course 
Code 
Title L T P C 
1.  Electric Power Quality 3 0 0 3 
2.  Smart Grid Technologies 3 0 0 3 
3.  Power System Deregulation 3 0 0 3 
4.  Real Time Control of Power 
Systems 
3 0 0 3 
5.  Advanced Power Systems 
Protection 
3 0 0 3 
6.  Grid Integration of Renewable 
Energy Sources 
3 0 0 3 
7.  AI applications in Power Systems 3 0 0 3 
8.  Power Systems Lab 0 0 3 1.5 
9.  Advanced Power Systems 
Simulation Lab 
0 0 3 1.5 
10.  Renewable Energy Technologies 
Laboratory 
0 0 3 1.5 
11.  Special Electrical Machines 3 0 0 3 
12.  Machine Modelling and 
Analysis 
3 0 0 3 
13.  Power Electronic Converters 3 0 0 3 
14.  Power Electronics for 
Renewable Energy systems 
3 0 0 3 
15.  Industrial Applications of Power 
Electronic Converters 
3 0 0 3 
16.  Advanced Electrical Drives 3 0 0 3 
17.  Power Converters Laboratory 0 0 3 1.5 
18.  Electric Drives Laboratory 0 0 3 1.5 
19.  Electric Vehicles Laboratory 0 0 3 1.5 
20.  Discrete Control Systems  3 0 0 3 
21.  Process Dynamic and Control 3 0 0 3 
22.  Optimal Control Theory 3 0 0 3 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Honors Engineering Courses offered to EEE Branch students 
Power Systems 
 
I Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Systems) 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Electric Power Quality 
        Pre-requisite: Power systems, Power Electronics. 
Course Objectives: 
 To learn effects responsible to power quality phenomena. 
 To learn about the transient over voltages and over voltage protection.  
 To identify sources for long duration over voltages and under stand the working of 
voltage regulating equipment. 
 Learn the effects of harmonic distortion on different electrical equipment. 
 To explain the relationship between distributed generation and power quality and 
importance of monitoring. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
 Differentiate between different types of power quality problems. 
 Explain the sources transient over voltages and over voltage protection.  
 Explain the principles long duration over voltages and vol tage regulation improvement 
methods. 
 Analyse voltage distortion and current distortion and their indices. 
 Know the concepts of inter facing the distributed generatio n technologies and power 
quality monitoring. 
 
UNIT - I 
Introduction  
Overview of power quality 3 Concern about the power quality 3 General classes of power 
quality and voltage quality problems 3 Transients 3 Long3duration voltage variations 3 Short3
duration voltage variations 3 Voltage unbalance 3 Waveform distortion 3 Voltage fluctuation 3 
Power frequency variations 3 Voltage Sag 3 Voltage Swell. 
 
UNIT - II 
Transient over Voltages and over voltage protection 
Sources of Transient over voltages - Principles of ove r voltage protection- Devices for over 
voltage protection 3 Utility Capacitor Switching Transients - Utility System L ightning 
Protection 3 Managing Ferro resonance 3 Switching Transient Problems with Loads. 
 
UNIT - III 
Long – Duration Voltage Variations and voltage regulation 
Principles of regulating the voltage 3 Devices for voltage regulation 3 Utility voltage regulator 
application 3 Capacitor for voltage regulation 3 End user capacitor application 3 Regulating 
utility voltage with distributed resources 3 voltage flicker. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT - IV 
Harmonic distortion and solutions 
Voltage distortion verses current distortion 3Harmonic indices: THD - TDD and True Power 
Factor3 Sources of harmonics 3 Effect of harmonic distortion 3 Impact on capacitors, 
transformers, motorsand meters 3 Concept of Point of common coupling 3 Passive and active 
filtering 3 Numerical problems. 
 
UNIT - V 
Distributed Generation and Monitoring 
Resurgence of distributed generation 3 DG technologies 3 Interface to the utility system 3 
Power quality issues and operating conflicts 3 DG on low voltage distribution networks. 
Monitoring 
Power quality monitoring and considerations 3 Historical perspective of PQ measuring 
instruments 3 PQ measurement equipment 3 Assessment of PQ measuring data. 
 
Textbooks: 
1. Electrical Power Systems Quality - Dugan R C - McGranaghan M F - Santoso S -  and 
Beaty H W -  Second Edition -  McGraw3Hill -  2012 -  3rd edition. 
2. Electric power quality problems 3M.H.J.Bollen IEEE series-Wiley india publications - 
2011. 
3. Power Quality Primer - Kennedy B W - First Edition - McGraw3Hill - 2000. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Understanding Power Quality Problems: Voltage Sags and Interruptions - Bollen M HJ - 
First Edition - IEEE Press; 2000. 
2. Power System Harmonics - Arrillaga J and Watson N R - Second Edition -John  Wiley& 
Sons -  2003. 
3. Electric Power Quality control Techniques - W. E. Kazibwe and M. H. Sendaula-  
VanNostrad Reinhold -  New York. 
4. Power Quality C.Shankaran -  CRC Press -  2001 
5. Harmonics and Power Systems 3Franciso C.DE LA Rosa3CRC Press (Taylor & Francis) 
6. Power Quality in Power systems and Electrical Machines3EwaldF.fuchs- Mohammad 
A.S.Masoum3Elsevier. 
 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
II Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Systems)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Smart Grid Technologies 
Pre-requisite: Basic Electrical Engineering, Power Systems, Signals & Systems 
Course Objectives: 
 To introduce students to the architecture, functions, and components of smart grids. 
 To explore the communication and control technologies integral to smart grids. 
 To examine the integration of renewable energy and distributed generation. 
 To understand demand-side management and smart grid applications. 
 To highlight challenges related to security, privacy, and regulation in smart grid implementation. 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, student will be able to  
 Understand the structure and benefits of smart grids. 
 Analyze communication technologies and protocols in smart grids. 
 Evaluate smart grid components like smart meters, energy storage, and distributed generation. 
 Apply concepts in demand response and load management. 
 Identify and address cyber security challenges in smart grids 
 
UNIT – I  
Introduction to Smart Grids 
Evolution of Power Grids: Traditional Grids vs. Smart Grids-K ey Characteristics of Smart Grids: Efficiency, 
Reliability, Flexibility-Smart Grid Architecture: Compone nts and Functions-Generation, Transmission, 
Distribution, and Consumption Sectors-Smart Grid Vision, Goal s, and Benefits-Economic, Environmental, and 
Operational Benefits-Role of ICT in Smart Grids: Data Management and Communication Infrastructure. 
 
UNIT – II  
Smart Grid Communication and Networking: 
Communication Technologies for Smart Grids:Wired (Ethernet, Fib er Optics) and Wireless (Zigbee, Wi-Fi, 
Cellular)-Power Line Communication (PLC) for Smart Metering a nd Control-Smart Metering Systems: 
Functionality and Communication Protocols: Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI)-Protocols in Smart Grids: 
IEC 61850, Modbus, DNP3, and others-Data Acquisition and Control Systems in Smart Grids-Integration of 
Internet of Things (IoT) in Smart Grid Communication. 
 
UNIT – III  
Smart Grid Components and Technologies  
Smart Meters: Role, Functionality, and Types-Energy Storage  Systems: Batteries, Supercapacitors, Flywheels, and 
Their Role in Grid Stability-Distributed Generation and Re newable Energy Integration: Solar, Wind, and 
Microgrids-Energy Management Systems (EMS): Load Flow Analysis and Optimization Techniques-Smart Grid 
Automation: SCADA Systems, Automated Metering, and Fault Dete ction-Real-Time Monitoring and Control: 
Techniques and Technologies. 
 
UNIT – IV  
Integration of Renewable Energy and Demand-Side Management  
Challenges in Integrating Renewable Energy into the Grid: Var iability, Intermittency, and Storage Solutions-Role 
of Smart Grids in Renewable Energy Integration: Grid Stabi lity and Power Quality, Wind and Solar Power 
Forecasting Techniques-Demand-Side Management (DSM) and Smar t Appliances: Load Shifting, Load Shedding, 
and Peak Demand Reduction, Role of Consumers in Grid Optim ization (Smart Home Technologies)-Electric 
Vehicle (EV) Integration and Smart Charging Infrastructure 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT – V  
Security, Privacy, and Policy Issues in Smart Grids  
Cyber security in Smart Grids: Threats, Vulnerabilities, a nd Risks:Cyber Attacks on Critical Infrastructure-Privac y 
Concerns and Data Protection in Smart Grid Systems: Consum er Data, Smart Meters, and Privacy Regulations-
Authentication, Authorization, and Secure Communication Proto cols: IEC 62351 Security Standards-Smart Grid 
Regulations and Policies: Global Standards and Frameworks. 
NIST, IEC, IEEE Standards, Policy Challenges in Grid Moderniza tion and Renewable Energy Adoption-Future 
Trends and Challenges in Smart Grid Development. 
 
Textbooks: 
1. "Smart Grids: Infrastructure, Technology, and Solutions" by Stuart Borlase 
2. "Smart Grid: Fundamentals of Design and Analysis" by James A. Momoh 
3. "Renewable Energy: Power for a Sustainable Future" by Godfrey Boyle 
4. Smart Grid Security: An End-to-End View of Security in the New Electric Grid" by Tony Flick 
and Justin Morehouse 
Reference Books: 
1. "Smart Grid: Technology and Applications" by Janaka Ekanaya ke, KithsiriLiyanage, Jiangzhou 
Wang, Nick Jenkins, and Xiangyu Zhang 
2. "The Smart Grid: Enabling Energy Efficiency and Demand Response " by Galina P. L. P. 
Shapiro. 
3. "The Smart Grid: Enabling Energy Efficiency and Demand Response" by Clark W. Gellings. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/107/108107113 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Systems)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Power System Deregulation 
Pre-requisite:Power System Analysis, Power System Operation and Control. 
Course Objectives: 
 To familiarize the students with concepts and need for deregulated power systems. 
 To impart the knowledge of power market development in India and across the world. 
 To understand the key factors in equipment specification and system design. 
 To learn about Ancillary Services Management 
 To familiarize with the Electric Energy Trading. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, student will be able to  
 Illustrate the operation of deregulated electricity mar ket systems and typical issues in    
electricity markets 
 Analyze various types of electricity market operational and control issues using new        
mathematical models. 
 Summarize power wheeling transactions and congestion management. 
 Analyze impact of ancillary services. 
 Understand the Power market scenarios and Electric Energy Trading in the World. 
 
UNIT – I  
Deregulation of The Electric Supply Industry 
Introduction, concept of Deregulation, Different entities i n deregulated electricity markets; Independent System 
Operator (ISO), Market Operator; Background to Deregula tion and the Current Situation Around the World; 
Benefits from a Competitive Electricity Market; After-Effects of Deregulation. 
Market Structure and Operation 
Objectives of Market operations; Electricity Market Models 3Pool Company, Bilateral Contracts and Hybrid; 
Power Market Types 3 Energy Services, Ancillary Services and Transmission Market s; Forward and Real-Time 
Markets; Market Power. 
 
UNIT – II  
Power System Operation in Competitive Environment 
Introduction, Role of the Independent System Operator; Operat ional planning activities of ISO 3 in Pool and 
Bilateral Markets; Operational planning activities of a Genc o 3 in Pool Markets, Bilateral Markets; Market 
participation issues; Unit Commitment in Deregulated Environment; Competitive Bidding. 
 
UNIT – III  
Transmission Open Access and Pricing Issues 
Introduction, Power Wheeling; Transmission Open Access; Cost  components in transmission; Pricing of Power 
Transactions 3 Embedded Cost Based and Incremental Cost Based Transmission P ricing. Security Management in 
Deregulated Environment; Congestion Management in Deregulation. 
 
UNIT – IV  
Ancillary Services Management 
General description of some ancillary services; Ancillary Ser vice Management in various countries; Check-List of 
Ancillary Services Recognized by Various markets; Reactive Power as an Ancillary service. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT – V  
Electric Energy Trading 
Introduction, Essence of Electric Energy Trading, Energy Trading Framework, Derivative Instruments of Energy 
Trading, Portfolio Management, Energy Trading Hubs, Brokers in Electricity Trading, Green Power Trading. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Operation of restructured power systems 3 K. Bhattacharya, M.H.J. Bollen andJ.E. Daalder, 
Springer(For Units 3 1,2.3, and 4) 
2. Market operations in electric power systems 3 M. Shahidehpour, H. YaminandZ. Li,Wiley(For 
Units 3 1 and 5 ) 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Power System Economics: Designing markets for electricity 3 S. Stoft, wiley. 
2. LoiLeiLai, <PowerSystemRestructuringandDeregulation=, 1st  edition, JohnWiley&SonsLtd., 
2012. 
 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Systems)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Real Time Control of Power Systems 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To understand the importance of state estimation in power systems. 
 To know the importance of security and contingency analysis. 
 To understand SCADA, its objectives and its importance in power systems. 
 To know the significance of voltage stability analysis. 
 To provide an in-depth understanding of the operation of dere gulated electricity market 
systems.  
 
Course Outcomes: 
 At the end of the course, students will be able to: 
 Illustrate different types of state estimations 
 Describe security and contingency evaluation 
 Demonstrate the computer control of power systems 
 To classify and compare the voltage stability issues. 
 Describe the various conditions of deregulation 
 
UNIT – I 
State Estimation: Different types of State Estimation s, Theory of WLS state estimation, sequential and 
non-sequential methods to process measurements. Observabilit y, Pseudo measurements, Bad data 
detection, identification and elimination. 
 
UNIT – II 
Security and Contingency Evaluation: Security concept, S ecurity Analysis and monitoring, Contingency 
Analysis for Generator and line outages by iterative linear power  flow method, Fast Decoupled model, 
and network sensitivity methods. 
 
UNIT – III 
Computer Control of Power Systems: Need for real time and computer control of power systems, 
operating states of a power system, Supervisory Control an d Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems 
implementation considerations, energy control centers, software requirements for implementing the above 
functions. 
 
UNIT – IV 
Voltage Stability, voltage collapse, and voltage security, r elation of voltage stability to rotor angle 
stability. Voltage stability analysis Introduction to voltage s tability analysis `P- V’ curves and `Q -V’ 
curves, voltage stability in mature power systems, long-te rm voltage stability, power flow analysis for 
voltage stability, voltage stability static indices and Research Areas. 
 
UNIT – V 
Need and conditions for deregulation. Introduction of Market structure, Market Architecture, Spot market, 
forward markets and settlements. Review of Concepts marginal  cost of generation, least-cost operation, 
incremental cost of generation, power system operation. 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Allen J. Wood and Bruce F. Wollenberg: Power Generation operat ion and control, John Wiley & 
Sons, 1984. 
2. John J.Grainger and William D.Stevenson, Jr.: Power System Ana lysis, McGraw-Hill, 1994, 
International Edition 
3. Prabha Kundur: Power System Stability and Control -, McGraw Hill, 1994. 
4. Steven stoft: Power System Economics-Designing Markets for  Electricity, IEEE Press and Wiley 3 
Interscience -2002. 
 
Reference Books:  
1. R.N.Dhar : Computer-Aided Power Systems Operation and Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill, 1982. 
2. L.P.Singh: Advanced Power System Analysis and Dynamics, Wiley Eastern Ltd. 1986. 
 
 
 
 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
V Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Systems)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Advanced Power Systems Protection 
 
Pre-requisite: Basic Concepts of Power Electronics, Electronic circuits, and Power Systems. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To analyze the static relay components and understand the role of components in static relay 
operation. 
 To understand the fundamentals of amplitude and phase comparators and study the different types 
of comparators and apply comparator techniques in static relays. 
 To explore the different types of static relays and understand the working mechanisms of each 
type in power system protection. 
 To explain the importance and working principles of Pilot Relaying Schemes and study the 
various pilot relaying methods. 
 To study the working of microprocessor-based relays and numerical relays and analyze the 
architecture and components of numerical relays 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, student will be able to  
CO1: Understand the fundamentals of static relays and analyze the working of static relay components. 
CO2: Analyze and compare the operation of comparators and select suitable comparator techniques. 
CO3: Explain the principles of static over current relays and apply in power system protection. 
CO4: Apply pilot relaying in power system protection and evaluate the performance of pilot relaying  
schemes. 
CO5: Illustrate the microprocessor and numerical relay protection 
 
 UNIT – I 
Static Relays classification and Tools: Comparison of St atic with Electromagnetic Relays, Basic 
classification, Level detectors and Amplitude and phase Compa rators 3 Duality 3 Basic Tools 3 Schmitt 
Trigger Circuit, Multivibrators, Square wave Generation 3 Polarity detector 3 Zero crossing detector 3 
Thyristor and UJT Triggering Circuits. Phase sequence Filters 3 Speed and reliability of static relays. 
 
UNIT – II 
Amplitude and Phase Comparators (2 Input): Generalized equations fo r Amplitude and Phase comparison 
3 Derivation of different characteristics of relays 3 Rectifier Bridge circulating and opposed voltage type 
amplitude comparators 3 Averaging & phase splitting type amplitude comparators 3 Principle of sampling 
comparators. 
Phase Comparison: Block Spike and phase Splitting Techniques 3 Transistor Integrating type, phase 
comparison, Rectifier Bridge Type Comparison 3 Vector product devices. 
 
UNIT – III 
Static over current (OC) relays 3 Instantaneous, Definite time, Inverse time OC Relays, s tatic distance 
relays, static directional relays, static differential relays, measurement of sequence impedances in distance 
relays, multi input comparators, elliptic & hyperbolic charac teristics, switched distance schemes, 
Impedance characteristics during Faults and Power Swings. 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT – IV 
Pilot Relaying Schemes: Wire Pilot Protection: Circulati ng current scheme 3 Balanced voltage scheme 3 
Transley scheme 3 Half-wave comparison scheme - Carrier Current Protection Schemes, relative merits & 
demerits: Phase comparison protection 3 Carrier aided distance protection 3 transfer scheme, blocking 
schemeand acceleration scheme. 
 
UNIT – V 
Microprocessor based relays andNumerical Protection: Ove r current relays 3 impedance relay 3 
directional relay 3 reactance relay. 
Numerical Protection: Numerical relay - numerical rela ying algorithms -mann-morrison technique - 
Differential equation technique and discrete fourier trans form technique - numerical over current 
protection - numerical distance protection. 
 
Text Books:  
1. Power System Protection with Static Relays 3 by TSM Rao, TMH. 
2. Power system protection & switchgear by Badri Ram & D N Viswakarma, TMH. 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Protective Relaying Vol-II Warrington, Springer. 
2. Art & Science of Protective Relaying - C R Mason, Willey. 
3. Power System Stability   KimbarkVol-II, Willey. 
4. Electrical Power System Protection 3C.Christopoulos and A.Wright- Springer 
5. Protection & Switchgear 3Bhavesh Bhalaja, R.PMaheshwari, NileshG.Chothani-Oxford publisher 
 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
VI Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Systems)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Grid Integration of Renewable Energy Sources 
 
Pre-requisite: Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering, Power systems, Power Electronics 
 
Course Objectives:  
The objectives of this course is to acquire knowledge on the  
 operation and control on the issues related to the integration of distributed renewable generation into 
the network.   
 power system equipment’s used for integration.   
 power quality and its management along with approaches for grid stabilization.   
 interpret grid stabilization scheduling and dispatch  
 deep understanding about integration techniques for RE sources. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
 explain operation and control on the issues related to the integration of distributed renewable 
generation into the network.   
 analysis of stability in power system integration using synchronous generators and induction 
generators.   
 determine challenges and issues in integration of renewable sources  
 interpret the load scheduling and dispatch  
 analysis of ac and dc integration techniques for multiple resources. 
 
UNIT I 
Introduction  
Various techniques of utilizing power from renewable energy source s, concept of nano/micro/mini grid. 
Need of integrating large renewable energy sources, issues re lated to integration of large renewable 
energy sources, rooftop plants. Concept of VPP. 
 
UNIT II 
Power system equipment for grid integration 
Synchronization/integration to existing grid, load sharing duri ng parallel operation, stability (swing 
equationand solution) Induction Generator: working principle, c lassification, stability due to 
variable speed and counter measures Power Electronics: need of power electronic equipments in 
grid integration, converter, inverter,chopper, ac regulator  and cyclo converters for AC/DC 
conversion.  
 
UNIT III  
Power quality and management   
THD, voltage sag, voltage swell, frequency change and its effe cts, network voltage management, 
frequency management, system protection, grid codes.  
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
UNITIV  
Grid stabilization 
Scheduling and dispatch, Forecasting, reactive power and volta ge control,frequency control, 
operating reserve, storage systems, electric vehicles Ancillar y services in Indian ElectricityMarket 
(regulatory aspect), CERC and CEA orders (technical and safety standards)   
 
UNIT V  
Integration of alternate sources of energy 
Introduction, principles of power injection: converting techn ologies, power flow; instantaneous 
active and reactive power control approach; integrating multiple renewable energy sources; DC link 
integration; AC linkintegration; HFAC link integration; islanding and interconnection 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Integration of Alternative sources of Energy, Felix A. Far ret and M. Godoy Simoes, IEEE 
Press 3 WileyInterscience publication, 2006.   
2. Grid integration of solar photovoltaic systems, Majid Jami l, M. Rizwan, D.P.Kothari, CRC 
Press (Taylor& Francis group), 2017   
3. Renewable Energy Grid Integration, Marco H. Balderas, Nov a Science Publishers, New 
York, 2009.  
4. Wind Power Integration connection and system operational aspects, B. Fox, D. Flynn L. 
Bryans, N. Jenkins, M. O' Malley, R. Watson and D. Milbor row, IET Power and Energy 
Series 50 (IET digital library), 2007 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Power Generation, Operation, and Control, Allen J. Wood, Bruc e F. Wollenberg, Gerald B. 
Sheblé, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2013 (3rd edition)  
2. Power Electronics: Circuits, Devices, and Applications. M.H. Rashid, Pearson Education 
India, 2013  
3. Advanced power system analysis and dynamics, L.P.Singh, New age international publishers, 
2017 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
VII Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Systems)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
AI applications in Power Systems 
Pre-requisites: 
Fundamentals of Power systems, Artificial Intelligence, Optimization Techniques 
Course Objectives: 
 Understand the fundamentals of Artificial Neural Networks ( ANN), including key 
terminologies, neuron models, activation functions, and learning strategies. 
 Explore and apply advanced ANN paradigms such as Back Propa gation, Radial Basis 
Function networks, and Kohonen’s Self-Organizing Maps. 
 Study classical and fuzzy sets, their properties, operations, and applications in handling 
uncertainty and decision-making. 
 Design and implement Fuzzy Logic Controllers (FLC) for  control systems using 
fuzzification, inference, and defuzzification techniques. 
 Apply AI techniques like back propagation and fuzzy logic in re al-world applications, 
such as load forecasting and load frequency control in power systems. 
 
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, student will be able to  
 Describe the fundamental concepts and components involved in the functioning of ANN and Fuzzy Logic 
systems. 
 Explain the functionality of different ANN models (e.g., perceptron, backpropagation) and fuzzy set 
operations. 
 Apply ANN algorithms and fuzzy logic techniques to solve practical problems like load forecasting and 
control systems. 
 Analyze the performance and limitations of various ANN models and fuzzy controllers in different 
applications. 
 Design and implement ANN-based solutions and fuzzy logic controllers for engineering applications, such 
as power system control and frequency regulation. 
 
 
UNIT– I  
Introduction  
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) 3 Humans and computers 3 Biological Neural Networks 3 ANN 
Terminology 3 Models of Artificial neuron 3 activation functions 3typical architectures 3 biases and 
thresholds 3 learning strategy(supervised, unsupervised and reinforced) learning r ules, perceptron training 
and classification using Discrete and Continuous perceptron a lgorithms, limitations and applications of 
perceptron training algorithm3 linear separability and non-separability with examples. 
 
UNIT– II  
ANN Paradigms  
Generalized delta rule 3 Back Propagation algorithm- Radial Basis Function (RBF) network. Kohonen’s 
self-organizing feature map (KSOFM), Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ) 3 Functional Link Networks 
(FLN) 3 Bidirectional Associative Memory (BAM) 3 Hopfield Neural Network. 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT– III  
Classical and Fuzzy Sets 
Introduction to classical sets - properties, Operations and relations; Fuzzy sets, Membership, Uncertainty, 
Operations, properties, fuzzy relations, cardinalities, membership functions. 
 
UNIT– IV  
Fuzzy Logic Controller (FLC) 
Fuzzy logic system components: Fuzzification, Inference engine (development of rule base and decision-
making system), Defuzzificationmethods. 
 
UNIT– V  
Application of AI Techniques  
Load forecasting using back propagation algorithm 3load flow studies using back propagation algorithm, 
single area and two area load frequency control using fuzzy logic. 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Introduction to Artificial Neural Systems - Jacek M. Zuarda, Jaico Publishing House, 1997. 
2. Fuzzy logic with Fuzzy Applications 3 T.J Ross 3 McGraw Hill Inc, 1997.  
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Neural Networks, Fuzzy logic, Genetic algorithms: synthesis and applications by RajasekharanandPai 3 
PHI Publication. 
2. Introduction to Neural Networks using MATLAB 6.0 by S N Sivanandam,SSumathi,S N Deepa   TMGH. 
3. Introduction to Fuzzy Logic using MATLAB by S N Sivanandam,SSumathi,S N Deepa   Springer, 2007. 
 
 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
VIII Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Systems)  
L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
Power Systems Lab 
 
Course Objectives:  
 To Understand and determine sequence impedances of an alternator using direct methods and fault analysis 
techniques, including the application of sequence voltages. 
 To Measure sequence impedance of three-phase transformers, analyze poly-phase connections of single-
phase transformers, and determine the equivalent circuit of a three-winding transformer. 
 To Study the Ferranti effect, measure ABCD parameters, and evaluate the performance of long 
transmission lines with and without compensation, including shunt and reactor compensation techniques. 
 To determine differential and percentage bias relay operations, analyze overcurrent relay characteristics, 
and understand relay-based protection schemes for generators and transformers. 
 To Apply theoretical concepts to practical scenarios, conduct experiments to measure system parameters, 
and analyze the impact of different protection and compensation techniques on power system performance. 
 
 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course, the student should be able to: 
CO 1: Calculate the sequence impedances of the synchronous machine. 
CO 2: Calculate the sequence impedances and explain the connections of the transformer. 
CO 3: Describe the Ferranti effect and compensation in transmission lines. 
CO 4: Analyze the performance and importance of transmission line parameters. 
CO 5: Analyze the operation of various protection relays. 
 
List of experiments 
Any 10 of the following experiments are to be conducted: 
 
1. Determination of Sequence Impendences of an Alternator by direct method. 
2. Determination of Sequence impedances of an Alternator by fault Analysis. 
3. Measurement of sequence impedance of a three-phase transformer 
a) By application of sequence voltage. 
b) Using fault analysis. 
4. Poly-phase connection on three single phase transformers and measurement of phase angle.  
5. Determination of equivalent circuit of 3-winding Transformer. 
6. Study of Ferranti effect in long transmission line. 
7. Measurement of ABCD parameters on transmission line. 
8. Performance of medium transmission line with and without compensation 
9. Performance of long transmission line with and without compensation. 
10. To determine and verify the reactor compensation of transmission line. 
11. Performance of long transmission line with shunt compensation. 
12. To study the differential and percentage bias integrated relay operations. 
13. Performance characteristics of Over current relay 
14. To study the protection of generator and transformer. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IX Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Systems)  
L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
Advanced Power Systems Simulation Lab 
 
Course Objectives:  
 To utilize advanced analytical and computational approaches to evaluate and enhance the stability 
of multi-machine power systems. 
 To apply optimal power flow techniques to improve system efficien cy and analyze unit 
commitment strategies for cost-effective power generation. 
 To conduct load flow studies and assess contingency scenarios  to ensure the reliability and 
resilience of power systems. 
 To implement state estimation techniques and power quality impr ovement strategies to maintain 
system reliability and performance. 
 To analyze the stability of Single Machine Infinite Bus (SMIB ) systems under different 
conditions, with and without controllers, to improve system dynamics. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO 1: Analyze the multi machine stability by advanced approaches. 
CO 2: Calculate optimal power flows and analyze unit commitment by optimal methods. 
CO 3: Analyze the load flow and contingency cases of power systems 
CO 4: Illustrate the state estimations and power quality improvements  
CO 5: Analyze the stability of SMIB with and without controllers 
 
 
List of experiments 
Any 10 of the following experiments are to be conducted: 
 
1. Multi Machine Transient stability using modified Euler’s method. 
2. Multi Machine Transient stability using R-K 2nd order method. 
3. Optimal Power Flow using Newton’s method. 
4. Unit Commitment using dynamic programming. 
5. Optimal Power Flow using Genetic Algorithm. 
6. Distribution system load flow solution using Forward-Backward sweep Method. 
7. Contingency analysis of a Power System 
8. State estimation of a power system using Weighted Least Squares Error Method 
9. Stability Analysis of SMIB using State space approach without PSS controller 
10. Stability Analysis of SMIB using State space approach with PSS controller 
11. Power Quality improvement using D-STATCOM 
12. Power Quality improvement using TSC and TSR  
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
X Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Systems)  
L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
Renewable Energy Technologies Laboratory 
 
Course Objectives:  
 To understand Solar PV Characteristics by developing and analyzing the mathematical model 
of a solar PV cell and study its characteristics under different operating conditions.  
 To evaluate PV Cell Combinations by investigating the performance of solar PV modules in 
series and parallel configurations by analyzing their I-V and P-V characteristics.  
 To explore Power Electronic Converters by examining the role of different power electronic 
converters in optimizing the performance of PV systems and improving energy conversion 
efficiency.  
 To implement MPPT Algorithms by demonstrating the significance of Maximum Power Point 
Tracking (MPPT) algorithms to enhance the efficiency of solar PV systems.  
 To analyze Wind Energy Generation 3 Study the working principles of wind turbines, analyze 
wind turbine performance curves, and evaluate power generation characteristics.  
 To model Uninterrupted Power Supply (UPS) by designing and analyzing of an Uninterrupted 
Power Supply (UPS) system to ensure continuous power delivery in renewable energy 
applications.  
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Analyze the mathematical model and understand its solar PV cell characteristics. 
CO2: Demonstrate the effect of series and parallel combination of PV cells by I-V and P-V curves. 
CO3: Analyze the effect of suitable power electronic converters for PV system. 
CO4: Demonstrate the significance of various MPPT algorithms on PV System. 
CO5: Demonstrate wind power generation and wind turbine curves. 
CO6: Analyze the model of Uninterrupted Power Supply. 
 
List of experiments 
Any 10 of the following experiments are to be conducted: 
 
Software Based Experiments: 
 
1. Simulate the Mathematical Model of a PV cell using Single Diode model and Two Diode model 
equivalent circuits.  
2. Simulate the performance curves (I-V & P-V) of a Solar cell and their variation with change in 
temperature and irradiation. 
3. Simulate the performance curves (I-V & P-V) for PV modules connect in series and their variation 
with temperature and irradiation. 
4. Simulate the performance curves (I-V & P-V) for PV modules connect in parallel and their 
variation with temperature and irradiation. 
5. Simulate the performance curves (I-V & P-V) for the effect of varying the series resistance on the 
fill factor of the PV cell. 
6. Simulate the Buck-Boost Converter with Closed Loop control. 
7. Simulate the Maximum Power Point tracking of PV module using INC Algorithm. 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
8. Simulate the Maximum Power Point tracking of PV module using P & O Algorithm. 
9. Simulate the Wind Power Plant model.  
10. Simulate the Uninterrupted Power Supply model. 
 
Hardware Based Experiments 
 
Using Solar PV Training System: 
11. Single PV module I-V and P-V characteristics with radiation and temperature changing effect. 
12. I-V and P-V characteristics with series and parallel combination of modules. 
13. Effect of shading on PV Module. 
14. Effect of tilt angle on PV Module. 
15. Demonstration of bypass and blocking diodeon a PV Module. 
 
Using Wind Energy Training System: 
16. Evaluation of cut-in speed of wind turbine. 
17. Evaluation of Tip Speed Ratio (TSR) at different wind speeds. 
18. Evaluation of Coefficient of performance of wind turbine. 
19. Characteristics of turbine (power variation) with wind speed. 
20. Power curve of turbine with respect to the rotational speed of rotor at fix wind speeds. 
21. Power analysis at turbine output with AC load for a Wind Energy System. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
XI Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Electronics)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Special Electrical Machines 
Pre-requisite: 
Basic knowledge on magnetic circuits and electrical machines.  
 
Course Objective: 
 To describe the operation and characteristics of permanent magnet dc motor. 
 To understand the performance and control of stepper motors, and their applications. 
 To explain operation and control of switched reluctance motor. 
 To distinguish between brush dc motor and brush less dc motor. 
 To explain the theory of travelling magnetic field and applications of linear motors. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
 Demonstrate the merits of PM motors. 
 Choose best control scheme for stepper motors. 
 Construct the various converter circuits for Switched Reluctance Motors. 
 Analyse the characteristics of Brushless dc Motor. 
 Understand the applications and operation of Linear Induction Motors. 
 
UNIT - I 
Permanent Magnet Materials and PMDC motors 
Introduction - classification of permanent magnet materials used in electrical machines - minor 
hysteresis loop and recoil line - Stator frames of convent ional dc machines - Development of 
electronically commutated dc motor from conventional dc motor  3 Permanent magnet 
materials and characteristics - B-H loop and demagnetiz ation characteristics-high temperature 
effects-reversible losses - Irreversible losses - Me chanical properties - handling and 
magnetization - Application of permanent magnets in mo tors - power density - operating 
temperature range - severity of operation duty- Hysteresis - Eddy current Motors. 
 
UNIT - II 
Stepper Motors 
Principle of operation of Stepper Motor 3 Constructional details - Classification of stepper 
motors 3 Different configuration for switching the phase windings - Co ntrol circuits for 
stepper motors 3 Open loop and closed loop control of two-phase hybrid stepping motor. 
 
UNIT - III 
Switched Reluctance Motors 
Construction and Principle of operation of Switched Rel uctance Motor 3 Comparison of 
conventional and switched reluctance motors 3 Design of stator and rotor pole arcs. 
Torque producing principle and torque expression 3 Different converter configurations for 
SRM 3 Drive and power circuits for SRM 3 Position sensing of rotor 3 Applications of SRM. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT - IV 
Permanent Magnet Brushless DC Motor 
Principle of operation of BLDC motor - Types of construct ions - Surface mounted and interior 
type permanent magnet BLDC Motors - Torque and EMF equations f or Square wave & Sine 
wave for PMBLDC Motor 3 Torque - Speed characteristics of Square wave & Sine wave fo r 
PMBLDC Motor -Merits & demerits of Square wave & Sine wave for PMBLDC Motor - 
Performance and efficiency 3 Applications. 
 
UNIT - V 
Linear Induction Motors (LIM) 
Construction3 principle of operation 3 Double sided LIM from rotating type Induction Motor 
3 Schematic of LIM drive for traction 3 Development of one-sided LIM with back iron - 
equivalent circuit of LIM. 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Brushless Permanent magnet and reluctance motor drives, Clarenden press, T.J.E. Miller, 
1989, Oxford. 
2. Special electrical Machines, K.Venkata Ratnam, University press, 2009, New Delhi. 
 
 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
XII Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Electronics)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Machine Modeling and Analysis 
 
Pre-requisites: Electrical Circuits and Electrical Machines 
Course Objectives: 
 To develop mathematical modeling of primitive machine & model t he DC machines for 
steady state & transient analysis. 
 To illustrate the phase/reference frame transformations and Develop mathematical modeling 
of three phase induction motor. 
 To interpret the knowledge of reference frame theory and obtain d-q axis modeling of 
induction motors in different reference frames.  
 To distinguish different inductances of a synchronous motor an d obtain synchronous motor 
modeling in the rotor’s dq0 reference frame. 
 To develop the mathematical models of special electrical machines. 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the course, student will be able to  
 Develop mathematical modeling of primitive machine & model th e DC machines for steady 
state & transient analysis. 
 Illustrate the phase/reference frame transformations and Develop mathematical modeling of 
three phase induction motor. 
 Interpret the knowledge of reference frame theory and obtain d-q axis modeling of induction 
motors in different reference frames.  
 Distinguish different inductances of a synchronous motor and obtain synchronous motor 
modeling in the rotor’s dq0 reference frame. 
 Develop the mathematical models of special electrical machines. 
 
UNIT– I  
Basic Concepts of Modeling & DC Machine Modeling 
Basic two-pole D.C. machine - Primitive 2-axis machine 3 Voltage and Current relationship 3 
Torque equation. Mathematical model of separately excited D. C. motor and D.C. Series motor in 
state variable form 3 Mathematical model of D.C. shunt motor and D.C. Compound motor in state 
variable form, Steady state analysis 3 Transient state analysis, Transfer function of the D.C.  motor, 
Sudden application of inertia load.  
 
UNIT– II  
Reference Frame Theory & 3-phase Induction Motor dq model 
Linear transformation 3 Phase transformation (abc to αβ0) 3  Power equivalence, Active 
transformation (αβ0 to dq0 ), transformations in complex plane,  Commonly used ref erence frames 
and transformation between reference frames, Circuit m odel of a 3 phase Induction motor 3 Flux 
linkage equation 3 dq transformation of flux linkages in the complex plane 3 voltage equations 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT– III  
Modeling of 3-phase Induction motor in various reference frames  
Voltage equation transformation to a synchronous referenc e frame, dq model of induction motor in 
the stator reference frame, rotor reference frame and arbi trary reference frame, power equation, 
electromagnetic torque equation, state space model in inducti on motor with flux linkages as 
variables and current-flux variables 
 
UNIT– IV  
Modeling of 3-phase Synchronous Motor 
Synchronous machine inductances 3 Circuits model of a 3-phase synchronous motor 3 derivation of 
voltage equations in the rotor’s dq0 reference frame electr omagnetic torque 3  State space model 
with flux linkages as variables. 
 
UNIT– V  
Special Machines 
Modeling of Squirrel Cage Induction Machine, Modeling of DFIG, M odeling of Permanent Magnet 
Synchronous motor 3 Modeling of Brushless DC Motor, Analysis of Switch Reluctance Motors. 
 
Text Books 
1. Generalized theory of Electrical Machines - Fifth edition , Khanna Publishers P. S. Bimbhra, 
1985. 
2. AC Motor control and electric vehicle applications 3 Kwang Hee Nam 3 CRC press, Taylor 
& Francis Group, 2010 
3. Analysis of Electric Machinery and Drive Systems, 3rd Editio n-Wiley-IEEE Press- Paul 
Krause, Oleg Wasynczuk, Scott D. Sudhoff, Steven Pekarek, Junr 2013. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Electric Motor Drives - Modeling, Analysis& control - R. Kr ishnan- Pearson Publications- 
1st edition -2002. 
2. Switched Reluctance Motor Drives: Modeling, Simulation, Analys is, Design, and 
Applications - R.Krishnan , CRC Press, Year: 2001 
3. Dynamic simulation of Electric machinery using Matlab / S imulink 3Chee Mun Ong- 
Prentice Hall, 2003. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/106/108106023/ 
 
 
 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
XIII Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Electronics)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Power Electronic Converters 
Pre-requisite: Power Electronics 
Course Objectives: 
 To learn the characteristics of switching devices and use of gate driver circuits 
 To understand the need of isolation and analyse the perform ance of different isolated switch 
mode converters 
 To learn the working of different multilevel inverters an d understand their merits and 
demerits 
 To apply PWM techniques for controlling fundamental voltage and mitigate harmonics in 
inverters 
 
Course Outcomes: After the completion of the course the student should be able to 
 
 Illustrate the characteristics of Switching devices and use gate drive circuits. Illustrate the 
operation of multilevel inverters and compare their features. 
 Analyze the performance of isolated switch mode converters. 
 Investigate the PWM Control of single-phase and three-phase inverters and compare various 
PWM techniques. 
 Investigate the PWM Control of CHB and diode clamped multilevel inverters. 
 
UNIT– I  
Overview of Switching Devices  
Power MOSFET, IGBT, GTO, GaN devices-static and dynamic charac teristics, gate drive circuits 
for switching devices. 
 
UNIT– II  
Isolated DC-DC Converters 
Need for isolated converters, Forward converter, forward co nverter with demagnetizing winding, 
flyback converter, push-pull converter, half-bridge converte r, full bridge converter, flux walking 
capacitors in half-bridge and full-bridge converters. 
 
UNIT– III  
PWM Inverters 
Voltage control of single-phase inverters employing phase displacement Control, Bipolar PWM, 
Unipolar PWM. Three-phase Voltage source inverters: Six stepped VSI operation-Voltage Control 
of Three-Phase Inverters employing Sinusoidal PWM, Third Ha rmonic PWM, Space Vector 
Modulation- Comparison of PWM Techniques- Three phase current source inverters. 
 
UNIT– IV  
Multilevel Inverters 
Introduction, Multilevel Concept, Types of Multilevel Inv erters, Diode-Clamped Multilevel 
Inverter, Principle of Operation, Features of Diode-Clam ped Inverter, Improved Diode Clamped 
Inverter, Cascaded H-bridge Multilevel Inverter, Principle of Operation, Features of Cascaded H-
bridge Inverter, Fault tolerant operation of CHB Inverter,  Comparison of DCMLI & CHB, Modular 
multilevel converters, principle of operation. 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT– V  
PWM Multilevel Inverters 
CHB Multilevel Inverter: Stair case modulation- Selecti ve harmonic Elimination(SHE) PWM- 
Phase shifted Multicarrier Modulation-Level shifted PWM- Di ode clamped Multilevel inverter: 
SHE PWM-Sinusoidal PWM- Space vector PWM-Capacitor voltage balancing. 
 
Text Books 
1. Power Electronics: Converters, Applications, and Design- Ned Mohan, Tore M. Undeland, 
William P. Robbins, John Wiley& Sons , 2nd Edition, 2003. 
2. Power Electronics-Md.H.Rashid 3Pearson Education Third Edition- First IndianReprint-
2008. 
3. High-power converters and AC drives -Wu, Bin, and Mehdi Nari mani-John Wiley & Sons, 
2017. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Elements of Power Electronics 3 Philip T. Krein, Oxford University press, 2014. 
2. Power Electronics Daniel W. Hart - McGraw-Hill, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
XIV Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Electronics)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Power Electronics for Renewable Energy systems 
Pre-requisites:  
Power Electronics, Electrical Machines Control Systems. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To Illustrate the I-V characteristics of solar PV modules and use of blocking diodes and bypass 
diodes for shade mitigation 
 To Understand MPPT, usage of power converters for PV and battery charging 
 To Understand different Wind turbine technologies and converters for wind energy generation 
 To Analyze PV and wind energy integrated systems 
  
Course Outcomes: At the end of the course, student will be able to  
 Illustrate the I-V characteristics of solar PV modules and use of blocking diodes and bypass diodes 
for shade mitigation 
 Understand MPPT, usage of power converters for PV and battery charging 
 Understand different Wind turbine technologies and converters for wind energy generation 
 Analyze PV and wind energy integrated systems 
 
UNIT – I 
Solar spectrum, PV materials, Equivalent Circuit for P V cell, effect of series and shunt resistance, 
fill factor, Cells to Modules to Arrays, I 3V Curves, standard test condition, Impacts of Temperature 
and Insolation on I3V curves, series and parallel connection of PV modules, Shading impacts on I 3
V curves, Bypass diodes and Blocking diodes for shade mitigation, I3V Curves for different loads. 
 
UNIT – II 
Perturb and observe MPPT method for solar PV inverter, Central inverters, String inverters, Micro 
inverters, leakage current issue, Transformer for leakage current elimination, Transformer less PV 
inverters. Battery charger, Characteristics of Batteries , Charge control, Battery charging using DC-
DC converter, Dual Active Bridge converter for battery charging. 
 
 
UNIT – III 
Wind turbine technologies- horizontal axis and vertical a xis turbines, power in the wind, wind 
turbine power curves, Betz limit ratio, advantages and disad vantages of wind energy system. 
Review of modern wind turbine technologies, Fixed and Variable  speed wind turbines, Doubly Fed 
Induction Generator, Permanent Magnet Synchronous Generators and their characteristics. 
 
UNIT – IV 
Converters for wind generators: AC-DC-AC converters, matr ix converters, multilevel converter, 
Maximum power point tracking for wind turbines, fault ride through capabilities. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT-V 
Grid connection principle, Clarke’s and Park’s transformation, Grid connected photovoltaic system, 
Grid connected wind energy system, Filters, Grid synchro nization & PLL, operation & control of 
hybrid energy systems, IEEE & IEC codes and standards for renewable energy grid integrations. 
 
Text Books:  
1. Renewable and Efficient Electric Power Systems, G. Maste rs, IEEE- John Wiley and Sons 
Ltd. 
              Publishers, 2013, 2nd Edition. 
2. Grid Converters for Photovoltaic and Wind Power Systems, Rem us Teodorescu, Marco 
Liserre, Pedro Rodriguez, Wiley, 2011, 2nd Edition. 
3. Integration and Control of Renewable Energy in Electri c Power System, Ali Keyhani 
Mohammad Marwali and Min Dai, John Wiley publishing company, 2010, 2nd Edition. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Solar Photovoltaic: Fundamentals, technologies & Applicat ions, C. S. Solanki, PHI 
Publishers, 2019. 
2. Integration of Renewable Sources of Energy, F. A. Farret, M . G. Simoes, Wiley, 2017, 2nd 
Edition. 
 
Online resources:  
1. https://onlinecourses.nptel.ac.in/noc22_ee71/preview 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
XV Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Electronics)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Industrial Applications of Power Electronic Converters 
Pre-requisites: Electrical Circuits and Power Electronics 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To analyze and design inverters for Induction Heating applications  
 To analyze and design converters for Lighting, pumping and refrigeration Systems 
 To analyze and design converters for High voltage power supplies  
 To develop improved power converters for Low voltage High current applications 
 To analyze and design Bi-directional converters for charge/discharge applications 
 
Course Outcomes: 
At the end of the course, student will be able to, 
 Analyze and design inverters for Induction Heating applications  
 Analyze and design converters for Lighting, pumping and refrigeration Systems 
 Analyze and design converters for High voltage power supplies  
 Develop improved power converters for Low voltage High current applications 
 Analyze and design Bi-directional converters for charge/discharge applications 
 
UNIT– I  
Inverters for Induction Heating:  
Inverters for induction cooking, induction hardening, melting, and welding applications. 
 
UNIT– II  
Power Converters for Lighting, pumping and refrigeration Systems 
Electronic ballast, LED power drivers for indoor and outdoor applications. PFC based grid fed LED 
drivers, PV / battery fed LED drivers. PV fed power supplies fo r pumping/refrigeration 
Applications. 
 
UNIT– III  
High Voltage Power Supplies 
Power supplies for X-ray applications - power supplies for  radar applications - power supplies for 
space applications. 
 
UNIT– IV  
Low Voltage High Current Power Supplies 
Power converters for modern microprocessor and computer loads. 
 
UNIT– V  
Bi-directional DC-DC (BDC) converters 
Electric traction, Automotive Electronics, Battery charg ing converters, UPS and its applications, 
Line Conditioners and Solar Charge Controllers, Solar PV tracking. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Switching Power Supply Design, Abraham I. Pressman, Keith Billings &Taylor Morey, 
McGraw Hill International, 2009, 3rd Edition. 
2. Uninterruptible Power Supplies and Active Filters, Ali Emadi, A. Nasiri, and S. B. 
Bekiarov, CRC Press, 2005, 1st Edition. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Hand book of Induction Heating, Valery Rudnev, Don Loveless, Raymond L. Cook, CRC 
Press, 2017, 2nd Edition. 
2. Power Supplies for LED Driving, Steve Winder, Newnes, 2016, 2nd Edition. 
3. Understanding Automotive Electronics: An Engineering Perspective, William Ribbens, 
Butterworth-Heinemann, 2017, 8th Edition. 
4. Modern Electric, Hybrid Electric and Fuel Cell Vehicles, M. Ehsani, Yimin Gao, Stefano 
Longo, K Ebrahimi, CRC Press, 2018, 3rd Edition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
XVI Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Electronics)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Advanced Electrical Drives 
 
Pre-requisite: Knowledge of Power Electronics, Electrical Machines and Control Systems 
 
Course Objectives: 
 
 To Provide a fundamental understanding of scalar and vector control principles in induction motor 
drives. 
 To Explore direct torque control (DTC) strategies and their applications in motor drives. 
 To Examine control techniques for synchronous motor drives, e mphasizing performance 
optimization. 
 To Introduce switched reluctance motor (SRM) control strate gies, including sensorless operation 
and torque regulation. 
 To Cover the principles and control methods for brushless  DC (BLDC) motor drives, ensuring 
effective operation. 
 
Course Outcomes: After the completion of the course, student will be able to 
CO1: Understand the concepts of scalar and vector control methods for drive systems. 
CO2: Select and implement proper control techniques for induction motor and  
Synchronous motor for specific applications. 
CO3: Analyze and design control techniques and converters for SRM drives 
CO4: Analyze and design controllers and converters for BLDC drives. 
 
Unit I 
Vector Control of Induction Motor Drives 
 Principles of scalar and vector control, principle of direct vector control, indirect vector control, 
implementation-block diagram; estimation of flux, flux weakening operation. 
 
UNIT-II  
Direct Torque Control of Induction Motor Drives 
Principle of Direct torque control (DTC), concept of space v ectors, DTC control strategy of induction 
motor, comparison between vector control and DTC, applications, space vector modulation-based DTC of 
induction motors. 
 
Unit III  
Control of Synchronous Motor Drives 
 Synchronous motor and its characteristics- Control Str ategies-Constant torque angle control- power 
factor control, constant flux control, flux weakening operation, load commutated inverter fed synchronous 
motor drive, motoring and regeneration, phasor diagrams.  
 
Unit-IV  
Control of Switched Reluctance Motor Drives 
SRM Structure-Stator Excitation-techniques of sensor le ss operation-convertor topologies-SRM 
Waveforms-SRM drive design factors-Torque controlled SRM-T orque Ripple-Instantaneous Torque 
control -using current controllers-flux controllers.  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
Unit-V  
Control of BLDC Motor Drives 
Principle of operation of BLDC Machine, Sensing and logic switching scheme, BLDM as Variable Speed 
Synchronous motor-methods of reducing Torque pulsations -Thre e-phase full wave Brushless dc motor -
Sinusoidal type of Brushless dc motor - current controlled Brushless dc motor Servo drive. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Bose B. K., "Power Electronics and Variable Frequency Drives ‟, IEEE Press, Standard Publisher 
Distributors. 2001. 
2. Krishnan R., <Electric Motor Drives 3  Modelling, Analysis and Control=, Prentice Hall of India 
Private Limited. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Switched Reluctance Motors and Their Control-T. J. E. Miller, Magna Physics, 1993. 
2. Power electronic converters applications and design-Mohan, Undeland, Robbins-Wiley 
Publications  
3. De Doncker, Rik W., Pulle, Duco W.J., Veltman, Andre, <Advance d Electrical Drives=, Springer, 
2020. 
4. Ned Mohan, <Advanced Electric Drives: Analysis, Control, a nd Modeling Using 
MATLAB/Simulink®=, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 2014. 
 
 
 
 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
XVII Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Electronics) 
L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
Power Converters Laboratory 
 
Course Objectives:  
• To illustrate the working of single and three-phase full converters and semi-converters. 
• To analyze the performance of Square-wave inverters and PWM inverters. 
• To analyze the performance of DC-DC converters. 
• To analyze the performance of three level NPC and Five level CHB inverters. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Illustrate the working of single and three-phase full converters and semi-converters 
CO2: Analyze the performance of Square-wave inverters and PWM inverters  
CO3: Analyze the performance of DC-DC converters 
CO4: Analyze the performance of Three level NPC and Five level CHB inverters 
 
List of experiments 
Any 10 of the following experiments are to be conducted: 
 
1. Analysis of single-phase half-controlled bridge rectifier 
2. Analysis of three-phase fully controlled rectifier. 
3. Analysis of single-phase square wave inverter. 
4. Analysis of three-phase inverter for 120º mode of conduction. 
5. Analysis of three-phase inverter for 180º mode of conduction. 
6. Analysis of single-phase inverter with unipolar PWM switching. 
7. Analysis of single-phase inverter with bipolar PWM switching. 
8. Analysis of three-phase inverter for Sine-PWM method. 
9. Analysis of three-phase inverter with SVPWM method. 
10. Analysis of Buck DC-DC converter. 
11. Analysis of Boost DC-DC converter. 
12. Analysis of Buck-Boost DC-DC converter. 
13. Analysis of Sine-PWM technique for 3-phase 3-level NPC inverter. 
14. Analysis of single-phase 5-level cascaded H-bridge inverter with staircase modulation. 
15. Analysis of Phase shift PWM techniques for 3-phase 5-level cascaded H-bridge inverter. 
16. Analysis of Level shift PWM techniques for 3-phase 5-level cascaded H-bridge inverter.
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
XVIII Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Electronics)  
L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
Electric Drives Laboratory 
 
Course Objectives:  
 Understand motor speed control techniques using various methods and controllers. 
 Analyze and simulate different motor drives under varying load conditions. 
 Implement open and closed-loop control strategies for different motor types. 
 Study braking and converter systems for improved motor performance. 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Apply speed control methods for various types of motors. 
CO2: Design and simulate motor drives for different applications. 
CO3: Implement control techniques to optimize motor efficiency. 
CO4: Evaluate braking and converter operations for motor drives. 
 
 
 
List of experiments 
Any 10 of the following experiments are to be conducted: 
 
1. Speed control of three phase slipring motor using static rotor resistance control through rectifier 
and chopper circuit. 
2. Design and simulation of three phase induction motor for different load condition. 
3. V / f Control or Frequency Control of Three phase Induction Motor. 
4. Open loop and closed loop control of BLDC motor. 
5. Open loop and closed loop control of dc motor. 
6. To study speed control of single-phase induction motor using micro controller 
7. To study speed control of three phase induction motor using micro controller 
8. To study the dc braking of three phase induction motor using MATLAB SIMULINK. 
9. To perform the speed control test on slip ring induction motor by rotor resistance control method 
USING VIRTUAL LAB 
10. To perform speed control of DC motor by using Ward- Leonard Method of speed control USING 
VIRTUAL LAB. 
11. Speed control of DC Motor using 3 Phase Fully controlled Bridge Converter. 
12. To Study Closed Loop Speed control of 4 quadrants DC motor drive. 
 
  
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
XIX Honors Engineering Courses 
(Power Electronics)  
L T P C 
0 0 3 1.5 
Electric Vehicles Laboratory 
 
Course Objectives:  
 To simulate Power Converters for EVs by analyzing and implem enting isolated and non-isolated 
DC-DC converters for electric vehicle applications using simulation tools. 
 To evaluate Motor Control Strategies by Studying and simulating adva nced motor control 
techniques such as Field-Oriented Control (FOC), Direct T orque Control (DTC), and closed-loop 
control for different EV propulsion motors. 
 To design and analyze EV Battery Systems by developing and fabricating a Li-ion battery pack for 
EV applications and perform controlled charging and discharging experiments. 
 To implement Hardware-Based Motor Control with Operation of i nduction motor and analyze its 
performance using V/F control and four-quadrant operation modes for EV applications. 
 To assess EV System Performance by measuring and analyzing  key  parameters such as voltage, 
current, speed, torque, and power flow in propulsion systems under different operating conditions. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Simulate and analyze the performance of isolated and no n-isolated DC-DC converters for electric 
vehicle applications. 
CO2: Implement and evaluate field-oriented and direct torque co ntrol (DTC) strategies for induction 
motor drives in EVs. 
CO3: Design and simulate a closed-loop control system for s witched reluctance motor (SRM) and BLDC 
motor drives for EV applications. 
CO4: Construct and analyze a Li-ion battery pack (48V/72V, 3/5 kWh) and study its charging and 
discharging characteristics. 
CO5: Perform real-time analysis of propulsion motor speed, vol tage, current, and power using throttle 
control. 
CO6: Demonstrate V/F control of induction motors and study the four -quadrant operation of propulsion 
motors, including motoring and braking modes. 
 
List of experiments 
 
Any 10 of the following experiments are to be conducted: 
 
Software Based Experiments: 
1. Simulation of isolated and non-isolated DC-DC converters for EV application.   
2. Simulation of Field oriented/DTC controlled Induction Motor drive for EV application.  
3. Simulation of Closed loop control of SRM drive for electric vehicle application. 
4. Simulation of Field oriented control of PMSM for electric vehicle application. 
5. Simulation of closed loop control of BLDC motor drive for electric vehicle application. 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Hardware Based Experiments
 
6. Running the propulsion motor by throttle paddle and analyze the speed, voltage, current, power of 
the system. 
7. Design and fabrication of 48V/72V, 3/5 kWh Li-ion battery pack.  
8. Constant current mode of charging/discharging of EV Battery.   
9. V/F Control of Induction motor drive for electric vehicle application. 
10. Study of four quadrant operation of propulsion motor and analyse all the parameters like voltage, 
current, speed, toque, and power flow.  
a) Forward motoring mode  
b) Forward braking mode  
c) Reverse motoring mode  
d) Reverse braking mode 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
XX Honors Engineering Courses 
(Control Systems)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Discrete Control Systems 
 
Course Objectives:  
The objectives of this course is to acquire knowledge on   
 elements of estimation for a dynamic model  
 analysis of parameter estimation for large scale systems  
 model reduction techniques and error minimization  
 simplification using frequency domain techniques   
 analysis of block-diagonalization of continuous systems   
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
 apply estimation for a dynamic model in large scale systems  
 analyse parameter estimation for large scale systems  
 design model reduction techniques and error minimization  
 analyse large scale systems using frequency domain techniques   
 design block-diagonalization of continuous systems 
 
UNIT I  
Modelling and parameter estimation  
Introduction to probability theory, elements of estimation  theory, application to parameter 
estimation for adynamical model, some methods for the determination of transfer functions. 
 
UNIT II  
Parameter estimation for large scale systems  
Hierarchical parameter estimation, the multiple projec tion approach, recursive algorithm for the 
minimum variance estimator Aggregation of control system s, problem statement, properties of the 
aggregated system matrix, determination of the Aggregation m atrix; Generation of feedback 
controls: linear dynamic optimization, bounds on sub optimality, eigenvalue assignment.  
 
UNIT III 
Model reduction techniques   
Model analysis approach, mathematical development, three basic methods, and a general approach. 
Subspace projection methods, projection error minimization , and derivation of reduced model. 
Optimal order reduction, problem formulation, conditions o f optimality, numerical algorithm, 
polynomial input functions. A comparative study. Extension t o discrete systems, preliminary 
analysis, two model reduction techniques, output error minimization. Examples.  
 
UNIT IV  
Model simplification using frequency domain techniques  
Simplification by continued function expansions: three Cauer forms, a generalized Routh algorithm, 
simplified models, relationship to aggregation, and extension  to discrete models; Approximation 
methods forsimplification: time moment matching, Routh-Hurw itz method. Minimal realization 
algorithms: conditions of reliability,aggregated model of Routh approximants 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT V 
Scale Analysis Block-Diagonalization of Continuous Systems  Problem statement, numerical 
algorithms, basic properties, relation to model aggregation.  Feedback control design: two stage 
eigenvalue placements. Decoupling of discrete systems: state feedback design. 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Magdi S. Mahmoud and Madan G. Singh 3 <Large scale systems modeling=, Pergamon 
press, Oxford.  
2. Lan Lunze 3 <Feedback control of Large-scale system s=, Prentice Hall International, 
NewYork. 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Magdi S. Mahmoud, Mohamed F. Hassan, Mohamed G. Darwish- <Large scale control 
systems - Theories and Techniques=, Marcel Dekkar, Inc, New Y ork and Basel.  
2. Andrew P. Sage, <Methodology for large-scale systems=, McGraw-Hill, 1977  
3. Efficient Modeling and Control of Large-Scale Systems, ed ited by Javad Mohammad pour, 
and Karolos M., Springer, 2010.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
XXI Honors Engineering Courses 
(Control Systems)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Process Dynamic and Control  
 
Course Objectives:  
The objectives of this course is to acquire knowledge on  
 classification and understand process control.  
 dynamic behaviours and responses of different processes.  
 feedback controllers and responses of control system instrumentation.   
 design and analysis of dynamic system.  
 design and different configurations of feedforward and ratio control. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
 understand process control.  
 Responses and behaviour of the system.  
 understand the PID controllers and response of feedback system.   
 Analyse closed loop system.  
 Design the feedforward controller for dynamic models. 
 
UNITI  
INTRODUCTION TO PROCESS CONTROL  
Representative Process Control Problems, illustrative E xample A Blending Process, Classification 
of Process Control Strategies, A More Complicated Examp le4A Distillation Column, The 
Hierarchy of Process Control Activities, An Overview of Control System Design 
 
UNITII  
DYNAMIC BEHAVIOR OF PROCESSES  
Laplace Transforms, Transfer Function Models, Properti es of Transfer Functions, Linearization of 
Nonlinear Models, Dynamic Behaviour of First-Order and Secon d-Order Processes, Standard 
Process Inputs, Response of First-Order Processes, Respon se of Integrating Processes, Response of 
Second-Order Processes 
 
UNITIII  
FEEDBACK CONTROLLERS AND CONTROL SYSTEM INSTRUMENTATION  
Introduction, Basic Control Modes, Features of PID Contr ollers, Digital Versions of PID 
Controllers, Typical Responses of Feedback Control Sys tems, On 3Off Controllers, Sensors, 
Transmitters, and Transducers, Final Control Elements, Accuracy in Instrumentation. 
 
UNIT IV  
DYNAMIC BEHAVIOUR AND STABILITY OF CLOSED-LOOP CONTROL SYSTEMS   
Block Diagram Representation, Closed-Loop Transfer Funct ions, Closed-Loop Responses of 
Simple Control Systems, Stability of Closed-Loop Cont rol Systems, Root Locus Diagrams 
Frequency Response Analysis and Control System Design Sinuso idal Forcing of a First-Order 
Process, Sinusoidal Forcing of an n th-Order Process, Bode Diagrams,Frequency Response 
Characteristics of Feedback Controllers, Bode Stability Criterion, Gain and Phase Margins   
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT V  
FEEDFORWARD AND RATIO CONTROL  
Introduction to Feedforward Control, Ratio Control, feed forward Controller Design Based on 
Steady-StateModels, Feedforward Controller Design Based on Dynamic Models, The Relationship 
Between the SteadyState and Dynamic Design Methods, Configurations for Feedforward3Feedback 
Control, Tuning Feedforward Controllers. 
 
Text Books:  
 
1. Process Dynamics and Control, 2nd Edition By Dale E. Sebor g, Thomas F. Edgar, and 
Duncan A.Mellichamp, Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2003, 736 pp.,  
2. Coughnaowr, D. R., <Process Systems Analysis and Control=, McGraw-Hill, Inc.  
3. Stephanopolous, G., <Chemical Process Control=, Prentice-Hall.  
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. P. Harriott, Process Control, Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., Ltd.,New Delhi, 1984 
2. A.Pollard, Process Control, Heinemann Educational Books, London,1981.  
3. T. Webber, An Introduction to Process Dynamics and Control , JohnWiley& Sons, New 
York, 1973.  
4. B.G. Liptak, Instrumentation in Processing Industries, Vol. II, Chilton Book Co., 1973.  
5. Bequette, B. W., <Process Control: Modeling, Design, and Simulation=, Prentice-Hall,  
Inc.  
6. Chidambaram, M., <Computer Control of Processes= Narosa Publishing House Pvt.  
Ltd., Ind.  
7. D.C. Sikdar,= Instrumentation and Process Control=, Khanna Book Publishing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
XXII Honors Engineering Courses 
(Control Systems)  
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Optimal Control Theory  
 
Course Objectives:  
The objectives of this course is to acquire knowledge on  
 representation of state space system performance measures  
 formulation of optimal control problem and linear regulator problems  
 fundamentals and applications of calculus of variations  
 optimal problems conditions and regulator problems  
 applications of different numerical techniques of optimal controls 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
 apply state space analysis and optimal control problems.  
 analyses the applications of dynamic programming and linear regulator problems.  
 apply the calculus functional concepts to the system.   
 assess the optimal control problems.  
 Apply different numerical techniques for optimal control problems. 
 
UNIT I 
Introduction 
Problem formulation‐ State variable representation of systems 3 Performance measures for optimal 
control problems 3 selecting a performance measure. 
 
UNITII 
Dynamic programming 
The optimal control law ‐ principle of optimality and it s application ‐ optimal control system ‐ 
interpolation ‐ recurrence relation of dynamic programmi ng‐computational procedure for solving 
optimal control problems characteristics of dynamic progr amming solution‐analytical 
results‐discrete linear regulator problems‐ Hamilton‐ Jaco bi‐Bellman equation‐continuous linear 
regulator problems Riccati Equation. 
 
UNITIII 
Calculus of variants:  
Fundamental concepts‐ linearity of functional‐closenes s of functions‐th e increment of a 
functional‐The variation of a functional‐ maxima and min ima of functional‐ the fundamental 
theorem of the calculus of variations ‐ Functional o f a single function‐ the simplest variational 
problem 
 
UNITIV 
Optimal control problems 
Necessary conditions for optimal control ‐ Linear regulator pro blem‐Pontryagin's minimum 
principle and state inequality constraints. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 3 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT V 
Iterative numerical techniques for finding optimal controls 
Two‐point boundary‐value problems‐The method of steepest desce nt‐Features of the steepest 
descent algorithm. 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Optimal control theory‐An Introduction by Donald E.Kirk ‐ Prentice Hall Networks series.  
2. M. Gopal: Modern Control Systems Theory, Wiley Eastern Limited, New Delhi, 2005 
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Katsuhiko Ogata: Modern control Engineering, Prentice-Hall of India, 2010  
2. B.C.Kuo, Automatic control systems' (5th Edition), Prentice Hall of India, 1988. 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Minor Engineering Courses offered by EEE Department for Other Branches  
(Except EEE Branch) 
Need to Acquire 18 credits 
 
 
S.No. Course 
Code 
Title L T P C 
1  Concepts of Control Systems 3 0 0 3 
2  Fundamentals of Electrical 
Measurements and Instrumentation 
3 0 0 3 
3  Concepts of Power System 
Engineering 
3 0 0 3 
4  Fundamentals of Power Electronics 3 0 0 3 
5  Basics of Electric Drives and 
applications 
3 0 0 3 
6  Fundamentals of Utilization of 
Electrical Energy 
3 0 0 3 
7  Concepts of Renewable Energy 
Sources 
3 0 0 3 
8  EV Technologies 3 0 0 3 
9  Basics of Electrical Machines 3 0 0 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
I Minor Engineering Courses L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Concepts of Control Systems 
 
Pre-requisite: 
Basic Engineering Mathematics 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To learn the mathematical modeling of physical systems and to  use block diagram 
algebra and signal flow graph to determine overall transfer function 
 To analyze the time response of first and second order s ystems and improvement of 
performance using PI, PD, PID controllers.  
 To investigate the stability of closed loop systems using R outh’s stability criterion and 
root locus method. 
 To learn Frequency Response approaches for the analysis of  LTI systems using Bode 
plots, polar plots and Nyquist stability criterion. 
 To learn state space approach for analysis of LTI syste ms and understand the concepts 
of controllability and observability. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Derive the transfer function of physical systems and determination of overall transfer 
function using block diagram algebra and signal flow graphs. 
CO2: Determine time response specifications of second order systems and to determine 
error constants. 
CO3: Analyze absolute and relative stability of LTI systems using Routh’s stability 
criterion and the root locus method. 
CO4: Analyze the stability of LTI systems using frequency response methods. 
CO5: Represent physical systems as state models and determine the response. 
Understanding the concepts of controllability and observability. 
UNIT – I 
Mathematical Modelling of Control Systems 
Classification of control systems - open loop and close d loop control systems and their 
differences - transfer function of linear system - differ ential equations of electrical networks - 
translational and rotational mechanical systems – block diagram algebra – Feedback 
characteristics. 
UNIT-II 
Time Response Analysis   
Standard test signals – time response of first and second order systems – time domain 
specifications - steady state errors and error constants – P, PI, PD &PID Controllers. 
UNIT–III 
Stability and Root Locus Technique 
The concept of stability – Routh-Hurwitz Criteria – limitations of Routh-Hurwitz criterion-
Root locus concept – construction of root loci (simple problems). 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
UNIT–IV 
Frequency Response Analysis 
Introduction to frequency domain specifications – Bode diagrams – Transfer function from the 
Bode diagram – phase margin and gain margin. 
 
UNIT–V 
State Space Analysis of Linear Time Invariant (LTI) Systems 
Concepts of state - state variables and state model - s tate space representation of transfer 
function - State Transition Matrix and it’s properties.
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Modern Control Engineering by Kotsuhiko Ogata - Prentice Hall of  India. 
2. Automatic control systems by Benjamin C.Kuo- Prentice Hall of  India - 2nd Edition.  
Reference Books: 
1. Control Systems principles and design by M.Gopal- Tata Mc Graw Hill education Pvt Ltd. - 4 th 
Edition. 
2. Control Systems by Manik Dhanesh N - Cengage publications.  
3. Control Systems Engineering by I.J.Nagarath and M.Gopal - Ne wage International 
Publications - 5th Edition. 
4. Control Systems Engineering by S.Palani - Tata Mc Graw Hill Publications
. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/107/106/107106081 
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/106/108106098 
3. https://nptelvideos.com/video.php?id=1423&c=14 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
II Minor Engineering Courses 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Fundamentals of Electrical Measurements and Instrumentation 
 
Pre-requisite: 
Basics of Electrical and Electronics Engineering. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 Interpret the working principles of various analog measuring instruments. 
 Understand the concepts behind power and energy measurement procedures. 
 Calculate resistance, inductance, and capacitance using various bridges. 
 Evaluate the importance of and understand the concepts of various transducers. 
 Comprehend the types of digital meters and their functionalities. 
Course Outcomes: 
After completing the course, the student will be able to: 
CO1: Choose the appropriate instrument for the measurement of AC and DC voltage and current. 
CO2: Analyse the operation of wattmeters and energy meters. 
CO3: Differentiate between the operations of AC and DC bridges. 
CO4: Describe the working principles of various transducers. 
CO5: Recognize the importance of digital meters and explain their working principles. 
UNIT – I: Fundamentals of Analog Instruments 
Analog Ammeter and Voltmeter: Classification of instruments  – Deflecting, controlling, and 
damping torques.Types of Instruments: PMMC and Moving Iron type – Construction, working 
principle, advantagesand disadvantages.Applications and simple numerical problems. 
 
UNIT – II: Measurement of Power and Energy 
Analog Wattmeter: Electrodynamometer type wattmeters – Low Power Factor (LPF) and Unity 
Power Factor (UPF) designs, advantagesand disadvantages. Ene rgy Meters: Induction type Energy 
Meter – Construction and working principle Simple numerical problems. 
 
UNIT – III: Measurement of Electrical Parameters 
DC Bridges:Measurement of resistance – Low (Kelvin’s double bridge), medium (Wheatstone 
bridge), and high resistance (Loss of charge method), Megger and its uses. 
AC Bridges:Measurement of inductance (Maxwell’s  Bridge) and capacitance (Schering Bridge), 
Numerical problems. 
 
UNIT – IV: Transducers and Sensors 
Classification of Transducers: Basics and applications.Re sistive: Strain Gauge. Inductive: Linear 
Variable Differential Transformer (LVDT). Capacitive: Piezoelectric – Applications 
 
UNIT – V: Introduction to Digital Instruments 
Digital Instruments:Digital Voltmeters (Successive approxi mation type),Digital Frequency Meters 
and Multimeters, Digital Tachometers and Energy Meters, – Overview and applications. 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Electrical &Electronic Measuring Instruments by A.K.Sawhney, DhanpatRai & Co. 
Publications – 19th revised edition - 2011. 
2. Electronic Instrumentation by H.S.Kalsi - THM. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Electrical Measurements and measuring Instruments by E.W. Golding and F.C.Widdis - 5 th 
Edition - Wheeler Publishing. 
2. Modern Electronic Instrumentation and Measurement Technique s by A.D. Helfrick and 
W.D. Cooper - PHI - 5th Edition - 2002. 
3. Electrical and Electronic Measurements and instrumentati on by R.K.Rajput - S.Chand - 
3rdedition. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105153 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
III Minor Engineering Courses 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Concepts of Power System Engineering 
Pre-requisite:Basic Electrical Engineering  
 
Course Objectives: 
 To understand the types of electric power plants and their working principles. 
 To understand the concepts of electric power transmission and distribution. 
 To gain the knowledge of protection and grounding of power system components. 
 To learn the economic aspects of electrical energy. 
 To learn the importance of power factor improvement and voltage control. 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Know the concepts of power generation by various types of power plants. 
CO2: Learn about short transmission line parameters and distribution systems schemes. 
CO3: Learn about protection equipment and grounding methods of power system. 
CO4: Calculate the tariff by applying the economic aspects of electrical energy. 
CO5: Know the importance of power factor improvement and voltage control in power  
systems. 
 
UNIT - I 
Electrical power Generation Concepts & Types 
Sources for Generation of Electrical Energy – working principle and Schematic diagram 
approaches of Thermal Power Plant – Hydro Power Plant - Nuclear Power Plant – Gas Power 
Plants – Comparison between Power Plants. Importance of Renewable energy sources. 
 
UNIT - II 
Transmission and Distribution Concepts 
Types of Conductors Materials – Parameters of Transmission Line – Classification of 
Overhead Transmission Lines – Performance of Short Transmission Lines – Simple Problems. 
Basic concepts of Sub Station – Distribution Systems – Connection Schemes of Distribution 
Systems – Structure of Cables – Differences between Overhead & Underground systems. 
 
UNIT - III 
Protection and Grounding 
Types of Faults – Basic concepts of fuse – Circuit Breakers – Relays – SF6 Circuit Breakers – 
Vacuum Circuit Breakers – Operation of Lightning Arrester – Grounding and its advantages - 
Methods of Neutral Grounding: Resistance - Reactance and Res onant Grounding (elementary 
approach only). 
 
UNIT - IV 
Economic Aspects 
Definitions of Load – Load curves& Load Duration Curves - Load Factor - Demand F actor – 
Utilization Factor – Types of Tariff - Cost of Electrical Energy – Expression for Cost of 
Electrical Energy – Numerical Problems. 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT - V 
Power Factor Improvement and Voltage Control 
Power Factor – Effects and Causes of low Power Factor- Shunt & Series Capacitor 
Compensation - Numerical Problems – Need of Voltage Control – Types of Voltage 
regulating Devices. 
 
 
Text Books: 
1. Principles of Power System,V K Mehta and Rohit Mehta, S.Chand Publishers, 2022. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Electrical Power Systems, C.L.Wadhwa, NewAge International Publishers, 2012. 
 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108102047 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
IV Minor Engineering Courses 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Fundamentals of Power Electronics 
Pre-requisite:  
Basic concepts of Electrical and Electronic CircuitsandSemiconductor Physics. 
 
Course Objectives: 
 To know the characteristics of various power semiconductor devices.  
 To learn the operation of single phase full–wave converters. 
 To learn the operation of three phase full–wave converters and AC/AC converters. 
 To learn the operation of different types of DC-DC converters. 
 To learn the operation of PWM inverters for voltage control. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Illustrate the static and dynamic characteristics of SCR- Power MOSFET and Power  
IGBT. 
CO2:Analyse the operation of phase-controlled rectifiers. 
CO3:Analyse the operation of Three-phase full–wave converters- AC Voltage Controllers. 
CO4:Examine the operation and design of different types of DC-DC converters. 
CO5:Analyse the operation of PWM inverters for voltage control. 
 
UNIT – I 
Power Semi-Conductor Devices 
Power Diode – Characteristics –Silicon controlled rectifier (SCR) – Two transistor analogy - 
Static and Dynamic characteristics– Turn-on Methods. 
Static and Dynamic Characteristics of Power MOSFET and Power IGBT. 
 
UNIT – II 
Single-phase AC-DC Converters  
Single-phase half wave-controlled rectifiers - R load an d RL load with and without freewheeling 
diode - Single-phase fully controlled bridge converter wit h R load and RL load - Continuous 
conduction - Expression for output voltages – Single-phase Semi-Converter with R load and RL 
load– Continuous conduction. 
 
UNIT – III 
Three-phase AC-DC Converters & AC – AC Converters 
Three-phase fully controlled rectifier with R and RL load - Three-phase semi converter with R and 
RL load - Expression for Output Voltage. 
AC power control by phase control with R and RL loads - Expression for rms output voltage. 
 
UNIT – IV 
DC–DC Converters 
Basic Chopper Operation with R and RL load –Step-up chopper –Classification of Choppers –
Time Ratio Control –Current Limit Control. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT - V 
DC–AC Converters 
Introduction - Single-phase half bridge and full bridge inver ters with R and RL loads – Voltage 
control of Single-phase inverters –PWM inverters - Sinusoidal Pulse Width Modulation. 
 
Text Books: 
1. Power Electronics – by P.S.Bhimbra- Khanna Publishers. 
2. Power Electronics: Essentials & Applications by L.Umanand  - Wiley- Pvt. Limited- India- 
2009. 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Power Electronics: Converters - Applications and Design by Ne d Mohan - Tore M 
Undeland- William P Robbins- John Wiley & Sons.  
2. Power Electronics: Circuits- Devices and Applications – by M. H. Rashid- Prentice Hall of 
India- 2nd edition- 1998 
3. Power Electronics: by Daniel W.Hart- Mc Graw Hill. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
1. https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/6-334-power-electronics-spring-2007 
2. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/101/108101126 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
V Minor Engineering Courses 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Basics of Electric Drives and applications 
 
Pre-requisite:  
Electrical Machines, Control Systems and Fundamentals of Power Electronics. 
 
Course Objectives: 
To make the students learn about:  
 To learn the fundamentals of electric drive and different electric braking methods. 
 To analyze the operation of single-phase converter-controlled dc motors and four quadrant 
operation of dc motors using dual converters. 
 To discuss the DC-DC converter control of dc motors in various quadrants. 
 To understand the concept of speed control of induction motor by using AC voltage controllers 
and voltage source inverters. 
 To understand the speed control mechanism of synchronous motors 
 
Course Outcomes: 
After the completion of the course the student should be able to: 
CO1: Explain the fundamentals of electric drive and different electric braking methods. 
CO2: Analyze the operation of single-phase converter fed dc motors and four quadrant operations  
of dc motors using dual converters. 
CO3: Describe the converter control of DC motors in various quadrants of operation 
CO4: Know the concept of speed control of induction motors by using AC voltage controllers. 
CO5: Explains the speed control mechanism of synchronous motors. 
 
UNIT - I  
Fundamentals of Electric Drives 
Electric drive and its components– Fundamental torque equation – Load torque components – 
Classification of load torques –Load equalization– Four quadrant operation of drive (hoist control). 
 
UNIT - II  
Controlled Converter Fed DC Motor Drives 
1-phase half and fully-controlled converter fed separately and self-excited DC motor drive – Output 
voltage and current waveforms and their expressions – Speed-torque characteristics. 
 
UNIT - III  
DC–DC Converters Fed DC Motor Drives 
Single quadrant – Two quadrant and four quadrant DC-DC converter fed separately excited and 
self-excited DC motors – Continuous current operation - Output voltage and current waveforms – 
Speed–torque characteristics. 
 
UNIT - IV  
Control of 3-phase Induction motor Drives 
Stator voltage control using 3-phase AC voltage regulators – Waveforms –Speed torque 
characteristics– Variable Voltage Variable Frequency control. Static rotor resistance control– Static 
Scherbius drive – Static Kramer drive – Performance and speed torque characteristics. 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT - V  
Control of Synchronous Motor Drives 
Separate control of synchronous motor – self-control of synchronous motor employing load 
commutated thyristor inverter - closed loop control of synchronous motor drive (qualitative 
treatment only). 
 
Text Books: 
1.   Fundamentals of Electric Drives, G. K. Dubey, Narosa Publications, 2002. 
2.  Power Semiconductor Drives, S.B.Dewan,G.R.Slemon, A.Straughen, Wiley India, 2009. 
 
 
Reference Books: 
1. Electric Motors and Drives Fundamentals- Types and Apllicati ons - by Austin Hughes and 
Bill Drury - Newnes.4th edition - 2013. 
2. Thyristor Control of Electric drives – Vedam Subramanyam Tata McGraw Hill 
Publications- 1987. 
3. Power Electronic Circuits- Devices and applications by M.H.R ashid - PHI - 3 rd edition -
2009. 
4. Power Electronics handbook by Muhammad H.Rashid- Elsevier - 2nd edition - 2010. 
  
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
VI Minor Engineering Courses 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Fundamentals of Utilization of Electrical Energy 
 
Pre Requisites: 
Electrical Machines, Power Electronics and Drives and Power Systems –II. 
 
Course Objectives: 
To make the students learn about:  
 Able to maintain electric drives used in an industries. 
 Able to identify a heating/welding scheme for a given application. 
 Able to maintain/ Trouble shoot various lamps and fittings in use. 
 Able to figure out the different traction schemes and its main components. 
 Able to design a suitable scheme of speed control for the traction systems. 
Course Outcomes: 
After learning the course, the students should be able to 
CO1: Get knowledge of electric drives used in industries 
CO2: Get knowledge of the principle of electric heating, welding and its applications and design 
      simpleresistancefurnaces.  
CO3: Design residential illumination schemes.  
CO4: Get knowledge of electric braking methods, control of traction motors 
CO5: Calculate tractive effort, power, acceleration and velocity of traction. 
UNIT – I  
Electric Drives 
Type of electric drives, choice of motor, starting and running c haracteristics, speed control, 
temperature rise – cooling and heating time constant, applications of elec tric drives, types of 
industrial loads, continuous, intermittent and variable loads, load equalization. 
 
UNIT – II 
Electric Heating and Welding 
Advantages and methods of electric heating, resistance h eating, induction heating and dielectric 
heating. Electric welding, resistance and arc welding, elec tric welding equipment, comparison 
between A.C. and D.C. Welding.  
UNIT – III 
Fundamentals of Illumination  
Introduction, terms used in illumination, laws of illuminati on, polar curves, photometry, integrating 
sphere,sources of light. Discharge lamps, MV and SV lamps – comparison between tungsten 
filament lamps and fluorescent tubes, Basic principles o f light control, Types and design of lighting 
and flood lighting. 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT – IV 
Electric Traction – I  
System of electric traction and track electrification , Review of existing electric traction systems in 
India, Special features of traction motor, methods of e lectric braking-plugging, rheostatic braking 
and regenerative braking. 
UNIT – V 
Electric Traction –II 
Mechanics of train movement. Speed-time curves for differ ent services – trapezoidal and 
quadrilateral speed time curves. Calculations of tractive  effort, power, specific energy consumption 
for given run, effect of varying acceleration and brakin g retardation, dead weight, adhesive weight, 
braking retardation, and coefficient of adhesion. 
Text Books: 
1. Utilization of Electric Energy, E. Openshaw Taylor and V. V. L. Rao, Universities Press, 2009.  
2. Art & Science of Utilization of electrical Energy, Partab, Dhanpat Rai & Co., 2004.  
3. Utilization of Electrical Power including Electric drives and Electric traction – byJ.B.Gupta, S.K. 
Kataria & Sons. 
Reference Books:  
1. Generation, distribution and utilization of electrical energy, C.L Wadhwa, Wiley Eastern 
Limited,1993. 
2. Electrical Power, S. L. Uppal, Khanna pulishers,1988. 
 
Online Learning Resources: 
 
1. https://archive.nptel.ac.in/courses/108/104/108104140 
2. https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108105060  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
VII Minor Engineering Courses 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Concepts of Renewable Energy Sources 
 
Pre-requisite:  
Electrical Machines, Engineering Physics and Fundamentals of Power Systems. 
 
Course Objectives:  
To make the students learn about 
 To introduce various energy sources and basic solar energy systems. 
 To explain the working and design of photovoltaic systems. 
 To understand wind and geothermal energy principles and systems. 
 To study ocean energy conversion methods and technologies. 
 To learn biomass conversion and basics of fuel cells and hydrogen energy. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the Course, the student shall be able to 
  CO1: Identify various energy sources and discuss the applications of solar energy. 
  CO2: Demonstrate the concepts of photovoltaic systems. 
  CO3: Outline the wind and geothermal energy sources 
  CO4: Illustrate ocean and wave energy conversion systems. 
  CO5: Summarize the biomass, fuel cells and hydrogen energy technologies. 
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                       
Introduction to Energy Sources 
Energy sources and their availability - non-conventional  sources - advantages of renewable energy 
sources - prospects of renewable energy sources  
Solar Energy: Extra-terrestrial solar radiation - terrestrial solar radiation - instruments for measuring 
solar radiation- Solar energy collectors - flat plat e collectors and concentrating collectors - 
Applications of solar energy - solar pond - solar water heater - solar cooking. 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                    
Photovoltaics 
Solar cell - equivalent circuit -characteristics of PV cell - PV array design - PV System components 
- Sizing and economics - Peak power operation - Fill Factor- MPPT (P&O only) 
 
UNIT-III  
Wind Energy 
Wind power sources - wind characteristics - site selection  - Criterion, momentum theory, WECS 
and its types - Components of wind energy systems - perfo rmance and limitations - classification of 
wind energy Turbines - Aerodynamic forces acting on blades - a pplications and environmental 
impacts. 
Geothermal Energy: Origin and types: Hydrothermal, Geo-pressur ized & Petro thermal, advantages 
and disadvantages of geothermal energy. 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                    
Ocean Energy 
Ocean temperature differences - principles of OTEC plant o perations. Open cycle and closed cycle 
system -Basic principle of tidal power, components of tidal  power plants, ocean waves - wave 
energy conversion systems. 
 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                      
Energy from Biomass 
Biomass conversion technologies, photosynthesis - biogas ge neration-factors affecting biogas 
generation - Bio fuels: Classification - direct combusti on for heat and electricity generator - 
anaerobic digestion for biogas - biogas digester – KVIC power generation. 
Chemical Energy: Fuel cells - Principle of operation of fuel cell - Types of fuel cells -applications 
of fuel cells - Hydrogen energy - Green hydrogen production (PV) - Storage and applications. 
 
Text Books: 
 
          1. G.D. Rai, Non-Conventional energy sources, 6th Edition, Khanna Publishers, 2011.  
          2. RenewableEnergyin Power Systems by Leon Freris and David Infield, John Wiley & Sons,  
              Ltd 
 
Reference Books: 
 
          1. John Twidell& Toney Weir - Renewable Energy Sources, E & F.N. Spon 
          2. G.S. Sawhney, Non-Conventional Energy Sources, 1st Edition, Prentice India Pvt. Ltd,  N        
             2012.  
          3. G.N. Tiwari and M.K. Ghosal, Renewable Energy Resources: Basic Principles and  
            Applications,1st Edition, Alpha Science International Ltd, 2004. 
          4.Chetan Singh Solanki, Fundamentals, Technologies & Applications, Solar     Photovoltaic,  
           PHI Publishers, 2019, 3rd Edition. 
 
Web References: 
1. Link: https://nptel.ac.in/courses/108/105/108105058/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
VIII Minor Engineering Courses 
L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
EV Technologies 
 
Pre-requisite:  
Electrical Machines, Power Electronics and Energy Storage Fundamentals 
 
Course Objectives:  
To make the students learn about 
 
 To understand EV powertrain fundamentals, system modeling, and types of electric vehicles. 
 To study thermal management methods for EV batteries, motors, and power electronics. 
 To explore EV charging technologies, standards, and charging infrastructure in India. 
 To understand PEV power flow, charging systems, and grid interac tion technologies like 
V2G. 
 To learn about sensors used in EV systems for monitoring temperature, pressure, position, and 
current. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the Course, the student shall be able to 
CO1: Describe the various principles of power trains of EVs an d the wiring layout of EV  
CO2: Illustrate the power converters used in EV  
CO3: Identify the chargers and their standards for chargi ng station of EV  
CO4: Differentiate different types of charging methods  
CO5: Identify the sensors used in EV  
 
UNIT-I                                                                                                                       
Electric Power Train  
Introduction, Principles of EV Power Trains and Their Pe rformance, System Modelling 
Fundamentals - Driving Cycles, Range Modelling; Wiring Layout of Electric Vehicle, Types of 
EVs. 
 
UNIT-II                                                                                                                    
Thermal Management 
Power Electronics, Battery and Motor - Types of cooling Technique s - De-rating Strategy for 
Vehicle. 
 
UNIT-III                                                                                                                    
Chargers and Charging Station in India 
Charging Technologies - Types of Chargers - On-Board and Off-Board Charging, Types of Guns - 
CCS, CHAdeMO, Type-2A, Bharat DC-001, Internal Structure, Speci fication, Power Requirements 
for Charging Station, Power Architecture of AC and DC Char ging Stations- Basics of information 
Exchange between EV and station - Wireless Charging 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
UNIT-IV                                                                                                                    
Plugin EV and Electrical Infrastructure 
Power Electronics for PEV Charging, Grid-Tied Home and Public  Systems, V2G, V2V and G2V 
Technologies, Impact of Charging and V2G Power Flow on the Grid. 
UNIT-V                                                                                                                      
Sensors 
Thermal Runaway Detection sensors - Temperature, Pressur e, Gas Concentration; Liquid Cooling - 
Temperature, Pressure, Level; Inverter Sensors-Temperature , Current sensors, Transmission, 
Position, Speed, Park Lock Position, Drive Mode Position 
 
 
Text Books: 
 
1. Power Electronics for Renewable Energy Systems, Transportation and Industrial  
Applications, Haitham Abu-Rub, Mariusz Malinowski and Kamal Al-Haddad, Wiley, IEEE  
Press. ISBN: 9781118634035  
2. Electric Powertrain: Energy Systems, Power Electronics and Drives for Hybrid, Electric and  
Fuel Cell Vehicles, By John G. Hayes and G. Abas Goodarzi, Wiley Publication.  
ISBN:9781119063643  
 
Reference Books: 
 
1. Handbook of Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure Impleme ntation, by Government of 
India  
2. Electric Vehicle Technology Explained, By James Larminie, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. ISBN: 
978-1119942733  
3. Automotive Electrical and Electronic Systems, Tom Denton , Routledge, Taylor and Francis 
Group, 5th Edition, 2017. ISBN: 9781315856629  
4. Power Electronics, Rashid.M.H, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 2008. ISBN: 978-
0133125900. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
 
IX Minor Engineering Courses L T P C 
3 0 0 3 
Basics of Electrical Machines 
 
Course objectives:  
The objectives of this course is to acquire knowledge on 
 To understand the construction and working of DC machines and analyze their performance. 
 To study single-phase transformers and assess their efficiency and regulation. 
 To learn the working principles of synchronous machines and their applications. 
 To understand the performance characteristics of three-phase induction motors. 
 To introduce the operational concepts of special machines used in various applications. 
 
Course Outcomes:  
At the end of the Course, the student shall be able to 
 Explain the working of DC generators and motors and determine their performance using 
tests. 
 Analyze the performance of single-phase transformers th rough equivalent circuits and 
testing methods. 
 Evaluate the EMF generation and regulation in alternator s and understand synchronous 
motor operations. 
 Describe the behaviour of three-phase induction motors under various operating conditions. 
 Identify and explain the functionality of various special  machines used in industry and 
domestic applications. 
 
 
UNIT - I  
DC Machines: 
Principle of operation of DC generator – EMF equation – types of DC machines – OCC & load 
characteristics of DC shunt generator - Principle of o peration of DC motor - torque equation - 
speed control methods – losses and efficiency – three-point starter - applications – Swinburne’s 
test - brake test - numerical problems.  
 
UNIT – II  
Transformers: 
Principle of operation and construction of single-phase  transformer – EMF equation – Losses - 
OC & SC tests - efficiency and voltage regulation of transformer – Numerical Problems.  
 
UNIT - III  
Synchronous Machines: 
Principle of operation and construction of alternators- types of alternators – EMF equation - 
regulation of alternator by synchronous impedance method ( EMF Method) - principle of 
operation and construction of synchronous motor – applications.  
 
 
 
 
 R-23 JNTUGV-CEV (A) Syllabus w. e. f. 2023 – 24 
 
DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERING  
JNTUGV COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING VIZIANAGARAM (A) 
 JAWAHARLAL NEHRU TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY GURAJADA VIZIANAGARAM 
 
 
 
UNIT IV  
Three-Phase Induction Motors: 
Principle of operation – construction – revolving magnetic field - types of three-phase 
induction motors – slip torque characteristics - maximum, starting and running toque s - losses 
and efficiency - starting methods brake test on 3-phase induction motor.  
 
UNIT V  
Special Machines:  
Principle of operation of single-phase induction motor -  different types of single-phase 
induction motors (split phase motor, capacitor-start motor, ca pacitor-start capacitor-run motor, 
shaded-pole motor) – Linear induction motor – stepper motor - universal motor. 
 
 
Text Books:  
 
1. Principles of Electrical Machines by V.K. Mehta & Rohit Mehta, S.Chand publications  
2. Theory & performance of Electrical Machines by J.B.Guptha, S.K.Kataria& Sons  
3. Electrical Machinery by P.S. Bhimbra, Khanna Publishers. 
 
Reference Books:  
 
1. Basic Electrical Engineering by M.S.Naidu&S.Kamakshiah, TMH Publications  
2. Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering by Rajendra Prasad, PHI Publications, 2nd edition  
3. Basic Electrical Engineering by Nagsarkar, Sukhija, Oxford Publications, 2nd edition 
 
